



















                                                   Lattice Amiga C Compiler
     ----------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                               Version 5.00




                                     The C Development System for the Amiga









                                                              Lattice, Inc.
                                                    2500 S. Highland Avenue
                                                          Lombard, IL 60148
                                                                        USA


                                         A Subsidiary of SAS Institute Inc.









































     Lattice C Compiler User's Manual

     Copyright (C) 1988 by Lattice, Inc., Lombard, IL, USA.

     All rights reserved.  Printed in the United States of America.  No
     part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
     system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic or
     mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without the prior written
     permission of the publisher, Lattice, Inc.



     Amiga is a registered trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     AmigaDOS is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     Commodore is a registered trademark of Commodore Electronics Limited.
     Kickstart is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines
          Corporation.
     Intuition is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     Lattice is a registered trademark of Lattice, Inc.
     LMK is a trademark of Lattice, Inc.
     MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation.
     UNIX is a registered trademark of AT&T.
     Workbench is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.


























                                    Preface

     The Lattice Amiga C Compiler is a complete development system for the
     Commodore Amiga.  This is a reference manual for the Lattice Amiga C
     Compiler.  Its primary purpose is to accurately describe all commands,
     utility programs, editor, debugger, environment variables, functions
     and external names that you will normally use while writing and
     executing C programs.

                                   Contents

     The manual consists of seven major sections:

     User's Guide (G)   This section describes the installation and
                        hardware requirements for the Lattice Compiler.  It
                        describes the directories and files and logical
                        name assignments.  It describes the Lattice
                        assembler, and presents information on AmigaDOS as
                        it impacts the compiler.  It covers compiler and
                        linker operation, and provides a Lattice C language
                        definition.  It contains a list of compiler and
                        linker error messages.  This section has the
                        pagecode "G" next to each page.

     Utilities (U)      This section describes the new programming
                        utilities included with the compiler.  These
                        include a profiler, a traceback facility, a make
                        facility, build and extract tools, global search
                        and replacement tools, a C cross-reference
                        facility, file manipulation utilities, and a word
                        count utility.  This section has the pagecode "U"
                        next to each page number.

     Commands (C)       This section summarizes all of the commands in the
                        Lattice Amiga C Compiler, including compiler,
                        linker, assembler, and utilities.  This section has
                        the pagecode "C" next to each page number.

     Editor (E)         This section describes the full screen Lattice
                        Screen Editor (LSE) which is custom tailored for
                        the Amiga.  It describes how to use the editor and
                        how it is integrated into the compiler for
                        in-memory edit and compile sessions.  This section
                        has the pagecode "E" next to each page number.

     Debugger (D)       This section describes the Lattice full-screen
                        symbolic debugger (CodePRobe) which is custom
                        tailored for the Amiga environment.  It describes
                        how to use the debugger and how to take advantage
                        of its advanced features, such as debugging
                        multi-tasking processes.  This section has the
                        pagecode "D" next to each page number.

     Library Reference  This section describes all of the library functions
     (L)                in the Lattice AmigaDOS C Library.  This section
                        has the pagecode "L" next to each page number.

     Preface                                                              i








     Master Index (I)   Each section has its own index and table of
                        contents.  The master index provides one section
                        that indexes the entire product.  This section has
                        the pagecode "I" next to each page number.

                                 New Features

     The Lattice Amiga C Compiler Version 5.0 is a upgrade to the Lattice
     Amiga C Compiler Version 4.0.  The major new features for Version 5.0
     include:

     680x0/6888x         The version 5.0 contains code generation support
                         for the entire family of processor chips including
                         68000, 68010, 68020, and 68030 processors, and the
                         math co-processor chips, 68881 and 68882.  The
                         compiler and related libraries optimize the code
                         generation for each of these chips.

     Better Performance  Version 5.0 produces more compact code and faster
                         code.  We have seen as much as 10% performance
                         improvements with the Version 5.0 system over the
                         Version 4.0.

     Global Optimizer    Version 5.0 introduces our global optimizer.  Some
                         of the benchmarks, e.g. Matrix, execute up to 58%
                         faster with the new global optimizer over the
                         Lattice Version 4.0 release.  The global
                         optimizer's dead code elimination feature
                         increases the performance of Float by over two
                         orders of magnitude.

     Full-Screen         Version 5.0 introduces the CodePRobe (CPR)
     Debugger            debugger.  This debugger provides you with a
                         full-screen symbolic interface to source code
                         execution.  CodePRobe supports advanced features
                         like multitasking debugging.

     Full-Screen Editor  Version 5.0 includes the Lattice Screen Editor
                         (LSE).  This editor has been fully developed for
                         the Amiga including gadget support and slider
                         bars.  It is fully programmable so that you can
                         customize the keystrokes of LSE to that of your
                         favorite editor.  LSE also supports integrated
                         development so that you can edit and compile from
                         the same command set.

     Programmer          Version 5.0 introduces numerous programmer
     Utilities           utilities.  These include:

                         Traceback      A utility that allows you to debug
                                        in the event of an abend.
                         Profiler       A utility that allows you to
                                        profile the execution of your
                                        application for performance tuning.
                         Build/Extract  Utilities that support command line
                                        generation.

     Preface                                                             ii








                         CXREF          A C cross-reference facility.
                         DIFF           A utility that prints out the
                                        differences between two files.
                         fd2pragma      A pragma generator.
                         Files          A file manipulation utility.
                         Grep           A global search facility.
                         Compact        A header file compressor facility.
                         LMK            A powerful make file utility.
                         Splat          A global replace facility.
                         Touch          A file manipulation utility.
                         WC             A word, sentence counting utility.

     Compatibility       Version 5.0 is fully upward compatible with
                         Version 4.0.  Object modules and libraries created
                         with either compiler may be freely mixed.  As with
                         any improvement, some of the newer features
                         (registerized parameters and debugging support)
                         will only be available to code compiled with the
                         5.0 compiler.

     Library             Version 5.0 contains numerous library enhancements
     Improvements        and new functions.  Many of the library routines
                         have been recoded to take advantage of better
                         algorithms.  Several performance sensitive
                         routines have been recoded into assembler to
                         provide the tightest code.  The new routines
                         include geta4, getenv, and putenv.

     ANSI Compliance     The compiler now supports the full ANSI
                         preprocessor with string support, token support
                         and appropriate scoping of substitution symbols.
                         The defined( ) directive is also supported.  In
                         addition, __DATE__ and __TIME__ provide the date
                         and time of compilation.  The compiler now uses
                         sequence points to ensure correct evaluation and
                         side effect generation according to the ANSI
                         standard.  Both the const and volatile keywords
                         are supported.  Function prototypes may now
                         include an optional parameter name.  Also
                         functions taking a variable number of arguments
                         may be indicated with ellipses '...'.  String
                         literals may now be concatenated to allow easier
                         coding of long strings.  (void *) correctly
                         coerces a type without any warning.  Many
                         diagnostics have been added to allow detecting
                         non-conforming programs.

     New Keywords        The compiler now recognizes several new keywords:

                         Keyword      Meaning
                         signed       Overrides any default unsigned
                                      options.
                         near         Declares a data item to be addressed
                                      relative to the global base register.
                                      When used with a subroutine, it
                                      indicates a pc relative subroutine

     Preface                                                            iii








                                      call.
                         far          Declares an item that must be
                                      addressed with a full 32 bit address.
                         huge         Same as far.
                         chip         Declares a data item that must be
                                      placed in chip ram and addressed with
                                      a full 32 bit address.
                         __regargs    Defines a subroutine that is to be
                                      called with registerized parameters.
                         __stdargs    Defines a subroutine that is to be
                                      called with standard stack parameters
                         __asm        Defines a subroutine that takes its
                                      parameters in a specific register.
                         __saveds     Defines a subroutine that is to load
                                      up the global base pointer upon entry
                         __interrupt  Defines a subroutine that may be
                                      called from interrupt code.

     Precompiled         To provide for faster compilation of a large
     Headers             project, the symbol table obtained by compiling a
                         program may be saved to disk.  This precompiled
                         header file may then be used as the starting point
                         of another compilation to eliminate reparsing the
                         header files encountered.

     Ignore Multiple     The compiler now supports an option to ignore
     Includes            multiple #includes of the same file.  In addition,
                         the search rules for #include files have been
                         modified to conform to standard UNIX search
                         conventions.

     Error Messages      To allow more error messages to appear on the
                         screen before scrolling off, we have adopted a
                         more condensed format of displaying the error
                         position in reverse video on the source line
                         followed by the error message.  This eliminates
                         the visual confusion caused by the seemingly
                         blank line between the message and the line.  With
                         the old format, there was a visual tendency to
                         associate the error message with the wrong line.

     Error Message       It is now possible to disable particular error
     Disabling           messages as well as to change the severity of most
                         messages.  Along with this, it is not possible to
                         specify a maximum number of errors allowed in a
                         compilation so that the compiler will abort.

     Improved Error      We have implemented an improved form of error
     Recovery            recovery for many of the common mistakes to
                         eliminate many of the situations that resulted in
                         a cascade of errors.

     Library Code        The library base for #pragma statements is no
     Generation          longer limited to being a single external pointer.
                         Any arbitrary expression may be used including
                         function calls and local variables.  This is

     Preface                                                             iv








                         intended to support generating code that resides
                         in a library.

     Big Compiler        In order to produce a compiler that fits well on a
     (LC1B)              smaller system, we have elected to provide a "big"
                         version of the compiler that includes some
                         additional features.  If you wish to take
                         advantage of these features (at a cost of about
                         20K), you must use this big compiler instead of
                         the standard one.  The big compiler provides a
                         full listing ability including macro expansion
                         display, nest level counting, and include file
                         listing.  This listing may also include an
                         optional cross reference of all variables, #define
                         values and structure tags.  The big version of the
                         compiler may be used to generate prototype files
                         of all functions encountered in a module.  This
                         eliminates the potentially tedious task of
                         constructing the list of prototypes for all
                         functions in a project.

     Amiga library       The compiler can generate code fully compatible
     support             with the requirement of an Amiga library routine -
                         A6 is removed from the compiler selection list and
                         A4 is made available for code use.  Note that this
                         code is incompatible with the -b1 option.

     Better control of   When generating code, you may now instruct the
     code optimization   compiler to choose code sequences optimized for
                         space or time depending on the type of application
                         you may be building.

     Registerized        Two styles of registerized parameters are
     Parameters          supported.  The -rr option cause the compiler to
                         automatically place up to four parameters in
                         registers for subroutine calls.  The __asm keyword
                         may be used in conjunction with a register
                         specification list to cause the compiler to pass
                         parameters in a given register.

     International       Error messages are now in separate files for easy
     Support             customizing to international error messages.

     Resident            The compiler and tools are now multitasking and
     Compatible          reentrant to support better use of the Amiga, and
                         for faster load times.  The compiler also builds
                         resident compatible modules.

                                Acknowledgement

     Lattice is grateful for the outstanding technical contributions to
     this product from SAS Institute.





     Preface                                                              v



