




















                                                         Lattice C Commands
     ----------------------------------------------------------------------




                           Command Summary for the Lattice Amiga C Compiler










                                                              Lattice, Inc.
                                                    2500 S. Highland Avenue
                                                          Lombard, IL 60148
                                                                        USA


                                         A Subsidiary of SAS Institute Inc.









































     Lattice C Commands Manual

     Copyright (C) 1988 by Lattice, Inc., Lombard, IL, USA.

     All rights reserved.  Printed in the United States of America.  No
     part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
     system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic or
     mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without the prior written
     permission of the publisher, Lattice, Inc.



     Amiga is a registered trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     AmigaDOS is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     Commodore is a registered trademark of Commodore Electronics Limited.
     Kickstart is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines
          Corporation.
     Intuition is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     Lattice is a registered trademark of Lattice, Inc.
     LMK is a trademark of Lattice, Inc.
     MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation.
     UNIX is a registered trademark of AT&T.
     Workbench is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga, Inc.



























                               Table of Contents


     1. Introduction to Commands                                         C1


     2. Lattice Amiga Compiler Commands                                  C2


     3. Lattice Amiga Environment Variables                             C86


                                  APPENDICES


     A. Compiler Command Summary                                        C91









































     Lattice Commands                                                     i








                                   Section 1

                           Introduction to Commands

     This section summarizes all of the commands in the Lattice Amiga C
     Compiler package.  Appendix A summarizes the options for the compiler
     commands, lc, lc1, and lc2, in a single table.

     The following is an index to all of the commands in the Lattice Amiga
     C Compiler package:


     COMMAND     DESCRIPTION                                           PAGE
     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
     asm         Lattice 68000 Macro Assembler                           C3
     blink       Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler                C7
     build       Inserts lines of text into a given file                C24
     cpr         CodePRobe source-level debugger                        C25
     cxref       Generates a cross-reference listing for C language     C28
                      source files
     diff        Determines the differences between two files           C30
     extract     Prints the names of files in specified directory       C32
     fd2pragma   Pragma Generator                                       C33
     files       Search, copy, or erase files or directories            C34
     grep        Global regular expression search and print             C36
     lc          Lattice C Compiler                                     C40
     lc1         Compiler pass 1                                        C56
     lc1b        Big compiler pass 1                                    C56
     lc2         Compiler code generator                                C58
     lcompact    Header file compressor                                 C59
     lmk         Maintain and update records of file dependencies       C61
     lprof       Execution Profiler                                     C67
     lse         Edit user files                                        C69
     lstat       Profile reader and printer                             C70
     omd         Object Module Disassembler                             C74
     oml         Object Module Librarian                                C75
     splat       Stream editor for performing character substitution    C80
     tb          Traceback Utility                                      C81
     touch       Adjust the time stamp on specified files to the        C84
                      system time
     wc          Tabulate the number of characters, words, lines        C85
                      within file















     Lattice Commands                                                    C1


















                                   Section 2

                        Lattice Amiga Compiler Commands












































     Lattice Commands                                                    C2








     asm                                      Lattice 68000 Macro Assembler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          asm     Lattice 68000 Macro Assembler

     SYNOPSIS

          asm [>listfile] [options] filename

     DESCRIPTION

     The AmigaDOS macro assembler is designed to generate assembly language
     components for inclusion in C programs, but it can also be used to
     generate programs entirely written in assembly language.  It supports
     the full set of 68000, 68020, 68030, and 68881 mnemonics, as well as
     an extensive set of assembler directives and a powerful macro
     facility.

     The assembler reads an assembly language source file and produces an
     object file in the Amiga object file format, along with an optional
     listing of the source and assembled code.  The format of the command
     to invoke the assembler is:

          asm [>listfile] [options] filename

     The various command line specifiers are shown in the order they must
     appear in the command.  Optional specifiers are shown enclosed in
     brackets.

     >listfile   Causes the listing and error message output of the
                 assembler to be directed to the specified file.

     options     Assembler options are specified as a hyphen followed by a
                 single letter; in some cases, additional text may be
                 appended.  The letter may be supplied in either upper or
                 lower case.  Each option must be specified separately,
                 with a separate hyphen and letter (that is, they cannot be
                 combined as they can for certain UNIX programs).  Current
                 options include:

                 -c         Specifies that the sections designated by the
                            characters which immediately follow are to be
                            loaded into memory addressable by the Amiga's
                            custom hardware.  This is necessary for screen
                            image and audio data.  The -c option must be
                            immediately followed by one or more of the
                            following letters in any order:

                            b     bss or uninitialized data

                            c     code segment

                            d     data segment


     Lattice Commands                                                    C3








     asm                                      Lattice 68000 Macro Assembler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                            The default action is to load the segments into
                            memory not addressable by the custom hardware
                            if it is available.  This is generally
                            desirable because it avoids bus contention
                            between the processor and the custom hardware.
                            Image and audio data must be loaded into memory
                            which is accessible by the custom hardware.
                            For example:

                                 -ccdb

                            will cause all segments to be loaded into chip
                            addressable memory, regardless of the system
                            memory configuration.

                 -d         This option has two uses.  It activates the
                            debugging mode and it defines symbols.

                            The -d option can also be used to define
                            symbols in the following ways.

                            -dsymbol         Causes symbol to be defined as
                                             if your source file had the
                                             statement:

                                                  symbol EQU 1

                            -dsymbol=value   Causes symbol to be defined as
                                             if your source file had the
                                             statement:

                                                  symbol EQU value

                 -h         Specifies that the sections designated by the
                            characters which immediately follow are to be
                            loaded into memory not addressable by the
                            Amiga's custom hardware.  The -h option must be
                            immediately followed by one or more of the
                            following letters in any order:

                            b     bss or uninitialized data

                            c     code segment

                            d     data segment

                            The default action is to load the segments into
                            memory not addressable by the custom hardware
                            if possible.  This option prevents the
                            specified segments from being loaded into chip
                            addressable memory even if no other memory is
                            available.  This situation can cause programs
                            to not execute if external high-speed memory is

     Lattice Commands                                                    C4








     asm                                      Lattice 68000 Macro Assembler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                            not available on the machine.  As an example:

                                 -hcdb

                            would cause all three sections to be loaded
                            only in high-speed ram.

                 -iprefix   Specifies that INCLUDE files are to be searched
                            for by prefixing the filename with the string
                            prefix, unless the filename in the INCLUDE
                            statement is already prefixed by a drive or
                            directory specifier.  Up to 4 different -i
                            strings may be specified in the same command.
                            When an unprefixed INCLUDE filename is
                            encountered, the current directory is searched
                            first; then file names are constructed and
                            searched for, using prefixes specified in -i
                            options, in the same left-to-right order as
                            they were supplied on the command line.  No
                            intervening blanks are permitted in the string
                            following the -i.  Note that if a directory
                            name is to be specified as a prefix, a trailing
                            slash must be supplied.

                 -l[list]   Causes a listing of the source file to be
                            written to the standard output.  The listing
                            displays the appropriate location counter and
                            data generation information alongside the
                            assembly source.  One or more of the following
                            characters may be appended to the -l option,
                            with the following effects:

                            x   Lists the expansion text for macros.

                            m   Lists additional data generated for source
                                lines which cannot be accomplished
                                alongside the original source line (i.e.
                                allows multiple listing lines for each
                                source line).

                            i   Lists the source for text from INCLUDE
                                files as well as the original source file.

                 -m0        Used for 68000 target.  Provides warning flags
                            if you attempt to use 68020 only instructions.
                            This is the default case.

                 -m2        Used for 68020 target.  Turns off the warnings
                            supplied in the -m0 option.

                 -oprefix   Specifies that the output filename (the .o
                            file) is to be formed by prefixing the input
                            filename (the .a file which is being assembled)

     Lattice Commands                                                    C5








     asm                                      Lattice 68000 Macro Assembler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                            with prefix.  Any drive or directory prefixes
                            originally attached to the input filename are
                            discarded before the new prefix is added.  No
                            intervening blanks are permitted in the string
                            following the -o.  Note that if a directory
                            name is to be specified as a prefix, a trailing
                            slash must be supplied.

                 -s         Includes the section name at the beginning of
                            each hunk.

                 -u         This option is needed to assemble the startup
                            code.  It prefixes external references with an
                            underscore (_).  If all external references to
                            C files have been prefixed with an underscore,
                            the option is not needed.

                 -w         This option works like the -d option on
                            shortint (e.g., -d shortint).

     filename    Specifies the name of the assembly language source file
                 which is to be assembled; this is the only command line
                 field which must be present.  If the filename is specified
                 without an extension, .a is assumed.  The object file
                 created by the assembler will have the same name as the
                 source file, except that an .o will be supplied in place
                 of any extension.

     EXAMPLE

     The following command causes the assembly language source file modn.a
     to be assembled, producing the object file modn.o.  A listing of the
     source file, along with any error messages generated, will be written
     to the file modn.lst.

          asm >modn.lst -l modn


















     Lattice Commands                                                    C6








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          blink     Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler

     SYNOPSIS

          BLINK [FROM | ROOT] beta [TO alpha][WITH alpha]
          [VER alpha] [LIBRARY | LIB beta][MAP alpha
          map_options] [XREF alpha][options]

     DESCRIPTION

     The blink command is for the Lattice linker.  The options for the
     command are:

     alpha     means a single file.

     beta      means one or more file name separated by a comma, plus sign,
               or space.

     The blink command provides a large number of keywords to give to use
     as linking options.  Our intention is to provide you with as many
     options as possible, even if some of the appear rather obscure.  The
     following keywords are recognized by blink:

     ADDSYM             Causes blink to emit HUNK_SYMBOL records for all
                        symbols in the input object files regardless of
                        whether or not the input object file was compiled
                        with the -d option.

                        This is extremely useful for use with a
                        source-level debugger such as Lattice CodePRobe.

     BATCH              Causes blink to supply the default value of 0 for
                        all undefined symbols.  Normally, blink will pause
                        after each undefined symbol to give you an
                        opportunity to correct the error.  If you specify
                        the BATCH option, it will not pause.

     BUFSIZE n          Sets the I/O buffer size for blink.  By default,
                        all I/O is done is 488 character blocks.  However,
                        you can alter the I/O performance by adjusting this
                        number.  In general the default is sufficient, but
                        may be decreased if memory is severely constrained
                        (at the price of performance).  Note that one
                        buffer is allocated for each file blink has open at
                        any one time (a maximum of 4).

     CHIP               Specifies that all hunks are to be placed in Chip
                        or display memory regardless of the input object
                        hunk specifications.

     DEFINE             Defines a symbol to be used in the linking process.

     Lattice Commands                                                    C7








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     symbol=symbol      This is particularly useful in conjunction with the
                        PRELINK option to force certain routines to be
                        pulled from the library even though no references
                        to them exist.

     DEFINE             Assigns a symbol to a value to be used in the
     symbol=val         linking process.  This is particularly useful in
                        conjunction with the PRELINK option to force
                        certain routines to be pulled from the library even
                        though no references to them exist.

     FAST               Specifies that all hunks are to be placed in Fast
                        or expansion memory regardless of the input object
                        hunk specifications.

     FASTER             A do-nothing option that is included only for ALINK
                        compatibility.

     FROM files         Specifies the object files that are the primary
                        input to the linker.  These object files will
                        always be copied to the root of the object module.
                        You must specify at least one object file for the
                        root.  If it appears as the first option to blink
                        then the FROM keyword is optional and may be
                        omitted.  ROOT is an acceptable synonym for FROM.
                        FROM may be used more than once with the files for
                        each FROM adding to the list of files to be linked.

     LIB files          Specifies the files to be scanned as libraries.
                        Only referenced segments from library files will be
                        included in the final object module.  LIBRARY is a
                        valid synonym for LIB.

     LIBRARY files      See LIB.

     MAP file options   Specifies a file to which a map is to be written.
                        The options argument controls which parts of the
                        map will be written.  See the MAP section for more
                        information and the list of map options.

     MAXHUNK n          Limits the maximum size hunk that blink will create
                        when coalescing hunks.  This can be used to control
                        fragmentation of memory.  The default size is no
                        limit on hunk size.

     ND                 See NODEBUG.

     NOALVS             Prevents blink from creating ALVs to resolve 16 bit
                        PC relative code.  This can be used to stop blink
                        from creating a non-relocatable object from what
                        was intended to be relocatable code.

     NODEBUG            Suppresses any HUNK_DEBUG, symbol table information

     Lattice Commands                                                    C8








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                        or hunk names in the final object file.  This is
                        equivalent to the object file that would be
                        produced if STRIPA were run on the final object
                        file.

                        Specifying NODEBUG will allow you to strip
                        debugging information given an executable that
                        contains it.  The syntax for this procedure is:

                             blink oldfile TO newfile NODEBUG

                        where oldfile is an executable file that contains
                        debugging information, and newfile is a new
                        executable file that will be stripped of debugging
                        information.  ND is a valid synonym for NODEBUG.

     OVERLAY            Specifies the start of an overlay tree terminated
                        by a line consisting of a single hash sign '#'.
                        See the discussion on Overlays later in this
                        description of blink.

     OVLYMGR file       Directs blink to use file as the Overlay Manager,
                        instead of the default.  The file should consist of
                        a single code hunk of name NTRYHUNK.

     PRELINK            Causes blink to output an object module with
                        references and definitions still intact so that it
                        can be linked later on to produce a final
                        executable file.  This is designed for development
                        of a large project where the programmer is only
                        changing a single source module.  Note that this
                        doesn't function with overlays.

     QUIET              Causes no messages to come out except in the case
                        of an error.

     ROOT files         Specifies the object files that are the primary
                        input to the linker.  These object files will
                        always be copied to the root of the object module.
                        You must specify at least one object file for the
                        root.  If it appears as the first option to blink
                        then the ROOT keyword is optional and may be
                        omitted.  FROM is an acceptable synonym for ROOT.
                        ROOT may be used more than once with the files for
                        each ROOT adding to the list of files to be linked.

     SC                 See SMALLCODE.

     SD                 See SMALLDATA.

     SMALLCODE          Causes all CODE hunks to be coalesced into a single
                        hunk.  SC is a valid synonym for SMALLCODE.


     Lattice Commands                                                    C9








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     SMALLDATA          Causes all DATA and BSS sections to be coalesced
                        into a single hunk.  This is useful for combining
                        all data hunks from a program into a single hunk,
                        decreasing load time but potentially producing
                        larger hunks that are difficult to scatter load.
                        SD is a valid synonym for SMALLDATA.

     TO runfile         Specifies target object module to create.  If
                        omitted it defaults to the same name as the first
                        object module listed on a FROM option with its .o
                        suffix removed.

     VER file           See VERIFY.

     VERBOSE            Causes blink to print out the names of each file as
                        it processes it.

     VERIFY file        A destination file to contain all linker output
                        messages.  If you do not specify it then all
                        messages go to the terminal.  VER is a valid
                        synonym for VERIFY.

     WITH file          Specifies a file containing blink command options
                        to be processed for this link.  More than one WITH
                        file may be specified as may WITH files containing
                        WITH statements.  The contents of all with files
                        will be treated as if they were specified on the
                        blink command line.

     XREF file          Specifies a file to which the cross reference
                        information will be written.  If not specified, and
                        a cross reference is requested with the MAP option,
                        the cross reference listing will appear as part of
                        the map file.

                        See the sample WITH files which begin the Example
                        section later in this description.

     Generate RAM-Resident Executables

     To generate an executable file that can be made resident simply link
     with the startup file cres.o, catchres.o, or catchresnr.o instead of
     the normal startup file c.o.  The executable file will have the PURE
     bit set.  There are some rules that must be followed when doing this:

          * Never use -b0 when compiling the file.

          * All read/write data hunks must be mergeable.

          * There should be no absolute references to writeable data.

          * Use #pragmas instead of amiga.lib when possible, since
            amiga.lib uses absolute addressing.

     Lattice Commands                                                   C10








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     In some cases it may be necessary to link with amiga.lib.  This is
     acceptable provided blink doesn't generate any warning about
     references to absolute symbols.

     The following diagram describes how resident programs exist in memory.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
             An old executable looks          When running resident
             like this:                       programs:

             ------------------------        ------------------------
             |                      |        |                      |
             |                      |        |                      |
             |         CODE         |        |         CODE         |
             |                      |        |                      |
             |                      |        |                      |
             ------------------------        ------------------------
             |                      |        |                      |
             |                      |        |     MERGED DATA      |
             |     MERGED DATA      |        |      (used only      |
             |                      |        |     during load)     |
             |                      |        |                      |
             ------------------------        ------------------------
             |                      |                    .
             |                      |                    .
             |      MERGED BSS      |                    .
             |                      |                    .
             |                      |                    .
             ------------------------        ------------------------
                                             |  Segment allocated   |
                                             |  by cres.o and used  |
                                             |  by running program  |
                                             |                      |
                                             |  Referenced off A4   |
                                             ------------------------

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
     Figure C-1   Running a Resident Program


     Each time the program is run a new data segment is created, old data
     is copied into it, and relocations are performed inside it.  When the
     program terminates, the segment is released.

     The special symbols that blink creates are as follows:

          _LinkerDB     pointer to data section

          RESOFF        offset that LinkerDB is in data (0 or 0x8000)

          RESLEN        number of longwords in data

          NEWDATAL      number of bytes in new data segment including BSS

     Lattice Commands                                                   C11








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     The number of relocs in the data segment is stored just after the data
     segment, with the relocs following this.

     Introduction to Overlays

     Overlays are code groups and data hunk groups which reside in main
     memory only while in use.  When one loaded group is no longer needed
     and another is required, the memory used by the old group is
     reclaimed, and may be used to load in the new group.  This group
     loading and unloading is performed automatically.

     Overlays on the Amiga are organized as a tree structure with nodes.
     Each node consists of a group of code hunks and data hunks.  The tree
     consists of a root node, which is permanently resident, and one or
     more overlay nodes.  The root node usually contains the libraries,
     your main program, and extensively used subroutines, etc.  The overlay
     nodes consist of hunks which are to be loaded only as needed to
     conserve memory space.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Root
                                        |
                                        |
                              -------------------
                              |                 |
                           overlay1          overlay2
                                                |
                                                |
                                       -------------------
                                       |                 |
                                    overlay3          overlay4
                                       |
                                    overlay5

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
     Figure C-2   An Overlay Tree


     In the overlay tree in Figure C-2, overlay nodes 1 and 2 execute
     independently, using the same memory, one at a time.  Also, if overlay
     node 2 is loaded, it can then load either of nodes 3 and 4, which
     share a block of memory in which they can execute.  Thus, if 3 is
     loaded and executing, 4 and 1 are not loaded, overlay node 2 is
     loaded, and overlay 5 may be loaded.  If overlay node 1 is loaded and
     executing, then nodes 2 through 5 are not currently in memory.

     Your overlay tree need not be a binary tree, balanced, or of a depth
     greater than 1.  You can have 50 overlay nodes, all hanging from the
     root node.  The nodes may be all mutually exclusive and independent of
     each other, or one long chain of overlay nodes.  You must decide which
     of your routines can operate independently of each other.

     Overlays are not a general-purpose mechanism.  They are intended

     Lattice Commands                                                   C12








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     primarily for large applications (100k or more), which must run in a
     small amount of memory in order to leave more room for data.  Such
     applications should also have a great deal of modularity, with a
     definite calling hierarchy among the code routines.

     One good example (except for size) is a linker.  Although it does not
     use overlays, it is feasible for blink to have overlays.  If you run
     blink with the VERBOSE option, you see messages about "Parsing, Pass
     1," and so on.  These represent clear phases of linking that are
     independent of each other; the only continuity is in the internal data
     structures they create and manipulate.

     To maximize available memory, either for the linker's data structures
     or for other concurrent programs and their data, blink could have been
     linked to use overlays, allowing no more than about 5 to 10k resident
     in memory at any given moment.  The sole overhead would be a slight
     drop in speed performance due to the individual loading of the
     separate overlay nodes.  Fortunately, since blink is relatively small
     and efficient in memory usage, it does not use overlays.

     The Overlay Manager

     Overlays depend on the Overlay Manager.  Every time a routine in an
     overlay node is referenced, a call is made to the Overlay Manager,
     which then scatter loads the desired overlay node, unloading any
     existing nodes which exist on another, mutually exclusive branch of
     the tree.  These calls to the Overlay Manager are done by blink
     automatically and are effectively invisible to your own code.

     The Overlay Manager can be put into the libraries rather than kept as
     a separate file, as under ALINK.  You can also override the original
     Overlay Manager with one of your own by using an extension in blink.
     (See Custom Overlay Managers later in this description for more
     information on this.)

     Using Overlays

     When using overlays, you should design your overlay tree after you
     have an idea of the calling hierarchy of your application.  Those
     routines which are called frequently, or which are called by almost
     every other routine in your application, should be placed in the root
     node.  Generally, the more commonly accessed the routine, the closer
     to the root node it should be.  Major independent routines, however,
     should be placed in nodes which are more in accordance with the
     general calling hierarchy.

     If you do not come up with an efficient tree, your program will merely
     be a little unorganized; an incorrect tree will result in a blink
     warning message.





     Lattice Commands                                                   C13








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          ------------------------------------------------------------
          |                                                          |
          |  Remember:  Always put your main program into the root   |
          |  node (using either FROM or ROOT).  Putting the main     |
          |  program in an overlay node will not work.               |
          |                                                          |
          ------------------------------------------------------------

     Overlay Node Restrictions

     There are restrictions when referencing routines across overlay nodes
     as illustrated in Figure C-3.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Root
                                    (a, b, c)
                                        |
                                        |
                              --------------------
                              |                  |
                           overlay1           overlay2
                            (d, e)             (f, g)
                                                 |
                                                 |
                                       --------------------
                                       |                  |
                                    overlay3           overlay4
                                      (h)                (i)
                                       |
                                    overlay5
                                      (j)

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
     Figure C-3   An Overlay Tree Example


          * Any of the overlay routines (d, e, f, g, h, i, j) can call any
            of the root node routines (a, b, c).

          * Any of the root level routines (a, b, c) can call any of the
            first overlay level routines (d, e, f, g).

          * Routines d and e can call each other and any root node
            routines.

          * Routines f and g can call each other, any of the root node
            routines, or routines h and i.

          * Routine h can call routines f, g, j, or any of the root node
            routines.

          * Routine i can call routines f and g, or any of the root node
            routines.

     Lattice Commands                                                   C14








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          * Routine j can call routines f, g, and h, or any of the root
            node routines.

     WITH Files

     Similar to ALINK, blink uses WITH files to inform the linker that you
     want overlays.  Indeed, the syntax is the same as for ALINK.  After
     the keyword OVERLAY, you should list the file or files of your node or
     nodes.  Use one line per node with as many files as you want per node.
     The node (i.e. file name groups) should be listed in pre-order
     fashion.

     Asterisks have another function in the syntax related to the linker.
     In addition to acting as a continuation symbol at the end of a
     continued WITH line of file overlays, they are also used at the
     beginning of a new line if the depth of the node being listed is
     greater than a numeric value of one.

     As an example of WITH file syntax, the tree described in Figure C-3
     would look as follows:

          OVERLAY
          overlay1
          overlay2
          *overlay3
          **overlay5
          *overlay4
          #

     Note that the "#" terminates the list as does an end-of-file.  Also
     note that since overlays 1 and 2 are at depth 1, they have no
     asterisks.  The depth of an overlay in the tree should be equal to the
     number of asterisks plus 1.

     The Map File

     When overlays are used, appropriate sections of the map file will
     include the information generated by the overlay nodes.  Overlay
     references and symbols will appear in the map file sections to which
     they apply.

     The map files sections specific to overlays may be obtained using the
     O option to the MAP keyword.  Using this option generates a section
     very much like the hunk section provided by the H option.  The O
     option has two additional fields which give the overlay level and
     overlay ordinate of the overlay node to which the code and data hunks
     belong.

     If you use the O option but have no overlays, nothing is produced.

     Custom Overlay Managers

     You can write your own overlay manager if you need one.  A cycle of

     Lattice Commands                                                   C15








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     compilation (or more likely, assembling) accomplishes this task.
     Include it with the command:

          OVLYMGR file

     The object file must contain the symbol _ovlyMgr.  This is exactly how
     the symbol must appear in the object file; the character case is
     important.  You may need to omit the leading underscore, since Lattice
     C and the assembler both put it in for you.  The code hunk must also
     have a section name of NTRYHUNK.

     If you wish to have your code hunk be the very first hunk in the file,
     you should use the section name NTRYHUNK.  blink always forces the
     section named NTRYHUNK to be the first hunk.  However, this hunk is
     never merged with any other hunk, and there can only be one such hunk.
     Also, use of this section name for your own code segment will mean
     that you cannot use overlays (unless the segment is your own overlay
     manager), but you should try to avoid using this.  You do not have to
     use OVLYMGR to use the section name NTRYHUNK - just list it as another
     object file.

     Note that the first hunk is also the program entry point.

     For further information about writing your own custom overlay manager,
     examine hunk 0 of a program which uses overlays.  It does exactly what
     is necessary to do the overlays and to handle the entry point problem.

     Compiler Options and Overlays

     The -b Option     This option causes all data within a program,
                       whether in a root node or an overlay node (if any),
                       to be merged into one large block which is
                       referenced via 16-bit references.  Overlays in blink
                       have no effect on this behavior.

     The -r Option     The -r option causes all subroutine references to be
                       via 16-bit relative branches.  This modification is
                       extended to overlay nodes, but not across them.
                       Routines in one overlay node being referenced by
                       routines in other overlay nodes are referenced via
                       an Overlay Call Vector or OCV, which is
                       automatically created for you.  An OCV is
                       responsible for telling the Overlay Manager to load
                       the desired overlay node.

                       References within a node which span more than 32k
                       are given an ALV or Automatic Link Vector.  Like an
                       OCV, an ALV is automatically created for you, and
                       guaranteed to transfer control to the actual routine
                       you were trying to reach.




     Lattice Commands                                                   C16








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          ------------------------------------------------------------
          |                                                          |
          |  NOTE:  If you use the -r compiler option and overlays,  |
          |  you will find the OCVs being referenced by ALVs when    |
          |  the -r compiler option is used.                         |
          |                                                          |
          ------------------------------------------------------------

     Other blink Options and Overlays

     SMALLCODE     When the SMALLCODE option is used with overlays, blink
                   tries to merge as much of the code as possible, without
                   crossing overlay node boundaries.  No code will ever
                   move out of the node it was defined to be in.

     SMALLDATA     When the SMALLDATA option is used with overlays, blink
                   merges data hunks together within each overlay node and
                   the root.  Data does not get moved across node
                   boundaries.

                   There is an exception:  if the -b compiler option was in
                   effect on any or all object files, the data segments of
                   those object files will all be moved into the root node.

     See Overlay Examples 1 and 2 in the Example section of this
     description.

     Map Files

     The command line structure for map files takes the form:

          MAP  map file  map options

     These files provide a large number of options for customizing the
     output format.  The map options are:

          F    H    L    O    S    X

     Note the use of just one character on most options.  The options may
     be used individually or combined in the general form:

          MAP [[filename],option,option,...]

     where:

          filename     map output file

          option       letter of report to produce (see following list)

     The following single character options are used to specify the report
     to be produced:

          F   MapFile        lists hunks in each file

     Lattice Commands                                                   C17








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          H   MapHunk        lists hunks by size and originating function
          L   MapLibraries   lists hunks by library function
          O   MapOvly        lists hunks in each overlay
          S   MapSym         lists where symbols are defined
          X   MapXref        cross-references symbols (both their
                                  definition and where they are used)

     To control the format and appearance of the reports specified by these
     single character options, use the following keywords:

     FANCY      Enables usage of printer control characters in the map file
                (default condition).

     FWIDTH n   Total number of columns in the map file, i.e. the width of
                file names (default 16).

     HEIGHT n   Total number of lines on a page in a map file.  A zero
                indicates no pagination (default 55).

     HWIDTH n   Hunk name field width, in columns, in the map file (default
                8).

     INDENT n   Number of columns to indent on a line in the map file.
                This is included in width (default 0).

     PLAIN      Turns off the FANCY map file option.

     PWIDTH n   Width of program unit name field in the map file (default
                8).

     SWIDTH n   Width of symbol names field in the map file (default 8).

     WIDTH n    Sets the maximum line length for the map and cross
                reference listings.  This is useful when sending the output
                to a device which has different line length requirements.
                If not specified, it defaults to 80.

     Special Names

     The following hunk section names are reserved to have special
     meanings:

     NTRYHUNK     There can only be one of these and the hunk with this
                  name will be the FIRST hunk in the output executable.
                  Usually this is used only by the Overlay Manager's code
                  hunk.

     __MERGED     Only data and BSS hunks with this name are permitted.  If
                  a data or BSS hunk has this name it will be merged with
                  any other hunks with the same name, and moved into the
                  root node (if overlay nodes exist).

     _NOMERGE     Any hunk with this name will never be merged with any

     Lattice Commands                                                   C18








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                  other hunk.  It will occupy a single, separate hunk in
                  the final output executable.

     The name BLINKWITH: is a special ASSIGN name to blink; if defined, it
     is assumed to be a default WITH file.  This file appears similar to
     any other WITH file, and its contents are always applied.  However,
     it does not prevent the usage of the command line or another WITH
     file.  Command lines and non-default WITH files do not override the
     default WITH file - they are effectively appended to it.

     Thus, creating a default OVERLAY tree is not a good idea and is
     flagged as an error.  The OVERLAY directive should only be used in a
     non-default WITH file.

     See Examples 3 and 4 in the Examples section of this description for
     examples of default and non-default WITH files.

     EXAMPLE

     Example WITH files

          from c.o
          vt100.o
          init.o window.o
          xmodem.o remote.o kermit.o script.o
          lib lib:lc.lib lib:amiga.lib
          VERBOSE
          SMALLCODE
          SMALLDATA
          to vt100

     An alternative would be to use a general header WITH file, then append
     the specifics to the end of the file.  This saves some typing each
     time you needed to create a WITH file.

          LIBRARY
          ram:lc.lib
          ram:amiga.lib
          SMALLDATA
          SMALLCODE
          MAP
          ram:mymap
          VERBOSE
          XREF ram:myxref
          FROM c.o
          vt100.o init.o window.o xmodem.o remote.o kermit.o script.o

     In the example just given, you will notice that no TO file was
     specified.  blink will automatically create a TO file for you in the
     current directory with the name of the first module in your FROM list
     not including the startup routine in this case c.o.  The executable
     will be called VT100 without the .o extension.


     Lattice Commands                                                   C19








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     Overlay Examples

     Example 1:  "Hello, World!"

     This example is based on the following functions:

          #include <stdio.h>

          void main()
            {
              Hello();
              World();
            }

          void SayWord(s)
             char *s;
             {
              printf("%s", s);
             }

          void Hello()
             {
              SayWord("\nHello, ");
             }

          void World()
             {
              SayWord("World!\n");
             }

     where the first two functions are defined in the file HW.C, and the
     other two are defined in HELLO.C and WORLD.C, respectively.

     While decidedly extravagant for a "Hello, World!" program, it can be
     used to demonstrate the basic operation of overlays with blink.

     After compilation, the object files HW.O, HELLO.O, and WORLD.O are
     available for linkage.  The following WITH file is given to blink to
     build the file:

          ROOT /lib/c.o hw.o
          OVERLAY
          hello.o
          world.o
          #
          LIBRARY  /lib/lc.lib  /lib/amiga.lib
          MAP hw.map hxsflo
          TO hw

     which corresponds to the following tree:




     Lattice Commands                                                   C20








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          c.o, hw.o, lc.lib, amiga.lib
                  |               |
               hello.o         world.o

     blink evaluates the WITH file, creating an executable called HW, and a
     map file with all possible map information, called HW.MAP.  The
     executable consists of a root node, containing all of the code and
     data in C.O and HW.O, and two separate overlay nodes, containing the
     code and data of HELLO.O and WORLD.O, respectively.  The data and code
     for the libraries LC.LIB and AMIGA.LIB are also in the root node.  To
     run the program, just do what you normally do to run a program.  The
     overlay operation is automatic, and you will see the message, "Hello,
     World!" printed out on your display.

     Example 2:  A General Editor

     Sorry, but there is no source code available for this one.  Suppose
     you had written a new program to edit both graphics and text in a
     window.  Immediately, two overlay nodes should come to mind:

          * One node for the graphics-specific editing routines.
          * Another for the text-specific routines.

     The reason is because if you are busy editing text, you do not need to
     keep the graphics routines loaded and vice-versa, giving you more
     memory for your data structures.

     Another feature of the program would be to print the edited data.  For
     this example, the internal data format is so elegant that you only
     need one print procedure to print both graphics and text (the text is
     treated as graphics).  Unfortunately, the print routine occupies 60k
     of memory.  Fortunately, the process in question is printing, which is
     only needed when requested by the user.  Another overlay node is
     created, probably out of the root node.  The tree for this application
     resembles the following:

          root, with miscellaneous I/O routines and main entry point
                       |                     |                    |
                   graphics                text               printing

     meaning a WITH file as follows:

          ROOT /lib/c.o omniedit.o
          OVERLAY
          graphedit.o
          testedit.o
          print.o
          #
          LIBRARY /lib/lc.lib /lib/amiga.lib
          TO omniedit

     Consider a situation where the graphics editor uses various iconic
     tools, such as a paintbrush, a fine-detail tool, and a flood-fill

     Lattice Commands                                                   C21








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     tool.  Only one tool can be used at a time, it's not necessary to keep
     the others in memory, particularly if spare memory is the prime goal.
     The routines which support these tools can be overlays hanging off the
     graphics overlay node, and the graphics node itself can just contain
     the code for refreshing the display window.  This makes the tree more
     like the following:

          root, with miscellaneous I/O routines and main entry point
                       |                          |               |
          graphics for window refreshing        text          printing
          |            |               |
          paintbrush   fine-detail     flood-fill

     which yields:

          ROOT /lib/c.o omniedit.o
          OVERLAY
          graphedit.o
          *paintbrush.o
          *finedetail.o
          *floodfill.o
          testedit.o
          print.o
          #
          LIBRARY /lib/lc.lib /lib/amiga.lib
          TO omniedit

     This refinement process could continue for several more levels.  The
     point is that it would easily adapt to overlays, which would minimize
     the memory requirements of the code of the program, and leave more for
     the application's data, and for the code and data of other
     applications running concurrently.

     As mentioned in the discussion on Special Names, the OVERLAY directive
     should only be used in a non-default WITH file.  Example 3 is a sample
     default WITH file.  Example 4 is a sample non-default WITH file.

     Example 3

          FROM /lib/c.o
          LIB /lib/amiga.lib /lib/lc.lib
          SMALLCODE  SMALLDATA  BATCH

     Example 4

          FROM maina.o mainb.o
          OVERLAY
          ov1a.o ov1b.o
          *ov2a.o
          ov1c.o
          #
          MAP miffle.map hsflxo
          TO miffle

     Lattice Commands                                                   C22








     blink                         Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     Note that the OVLYMGR directive can be used in the default WITH file,
     although it is not recommended (like OVERLAY).




















































     Lattice Commands                                                   C23








     build                          Inserts lines of text into a given file
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          build     Inserts lines of text into a given file

     SYNOPSIS

          build >alpha beta

     DESCRIPTION

     This utility takes input from the standard input device - the
     keyboard.  The contents of the input stream are then inserted between
     the current line in the file beta.  After receipt of the input
     terminator characters (<CTRL-\>), build moves down to the next line in
     the file named beta.  The process is repeated until the end-of-file
     position is reached.  The resulting file alpha then contains the
     original lines of characters from the file named beta interleaved with
     lines of input from the keyboard.




































     Lattice Commands                                                   C24








     cpr                                    CodePRobe source-level debugger
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          cpr     CodePRobe source-level debugger

     SYNOPSIS

          cpr [options] application name [application arguments]

     DESCRIPTION

     CodePRobe is a source-level debugger that allows you to examine the
     behavior of a program written in the C language using the constructs
     of the language.  CodePRobe allows you to run a program in a
     controlled environment where execution can be stopped at any point.
     For instance, breakpoints can be set at particular source lines or
     within modules of interest.

     CodePRobe comprises four windows:  the Dialog Window and the Source
     Window open by default, while the Watch Window and the Register Window
     may be opened by function keys.

     An application program can be run under debugger control by typing
     "cpr" followed by the command line normally used to invoke the
     program.  To display the C source symbols and attributes of your
     program, you must take certain steps when you compile and link the
     program.  (Refer to the descriptions of debugger options in the
     discussion of the lc command in this section.)

     When the cpr command is invoked, CodePRobe makes the following
     assumptions:

          * The program specified on the command line exists in the current
            directory or in the execution path defined by AmigaDOS.

          * The modules making up the program to be debugged have been
            compiled with one or more of the debugging options and have
            been linked using the ADDSYM option of the linker.

          * Any source files you want to access (e.g., to set breakpoints
            at source lines) exist in either the current directory, your
            special source path list, or the directory in which the module
            was compiled.

     To stop CodePRobe at any time, you need only issue the quit command
     (abbreviated as q).  You can also restart your program without
     quitting CodePRobe by means of the restart command.

     The CodePRobe environment can be customized by a number of available
     command-line options.  (If there are any command-line options for the
     program you are debugging, you must include these on the command line
     as well.)  You can use the following command-line options when
     invoking CodePRobe:


     Lattice Commands                                                   C25








     cpr                                    CodePRobe source-level debugger
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     Window             Use the -wdialog, -wregister, -wsource, and -wwatch
     Dimension          options to specify start-up window coordinates for
     options            the Dialog, Register, Source and Watch Windows,
                        respectively.  Window coordinates are measured in
                        character positions.  A width or height of 0 causes
                        the window to extend to the screen border on the
                        right or bottom, respectively.  The option names
                        can be abbreviated to two letters:

                             -wd[ialog]  left  top  width  height
                             -wr[egister]  left  top  width  height
                             -ws[ource]  left  top  width  height
                             -ww[atch]  left  top  width  height

                        For example:

                             cpr -ws 0 1 50 12 -wd 0 13 50 0 ftoc

     Workbench          Use the -w option to setup CodePRobe in the
     option             Workbench screen instead of a new screen.

     Interlace option   Use the -i option to setup a screen in interlace
                        mode.  By default, CodePRobe opens a new screen
                        using the specifications set up by Preferences for
                        Workbench screens.  If you wish to set up a screen
                        in interlace mode, include the -i option before
                        typing the application command name.

     Command option     Use the -command option (followed by specific
                        commands) to execute debugger commands on startup.
                        The commands are executed after the "go main" if
                        the -startup option is not specified, or after the
                        profile script if it is specified.  (Profile
                        scripts are discussed later in the description.)
                        For example:

                             cpr -command "proceed; display fahr"

                        would execute to main, step over 1 line of code and
                        display the variable fahr in the Dialog Window
                        before giving control to the user.

     Line option        Use the -line option to start CodePRobe in line
                        mode.  Line mode causes the debugger to run in the
                        current CLI window.  Only a Dialog Window is
                        provided.  Line mode is probably only useful for
                        running from a script file, redirecting output
                        using the CLI redirection facility, or running from
                        a remote terminal over a communications port.

     Startup option     The -startup option suppresses the automatic "go
                        main" that is normally executed by the debugger on
                        startup.  This option is useful if your application

     Lattice Commands                                                   C26








     cpr                                    CodePRobe source-level debugger
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                        redefines main or c.a so that no main function
                        exists or if you wish to step through such code.
                        If this option is used, no initialization of any
                        kind will have been performed by the application
                        process before control returns to the user.

                        If the quit, start, or restart commands are invoked
                        and an application process has not exited, the
                        debugger normally calls exit to cleanup any process
                        resources that may not have been freed.  However,
                        if the -startup option was used, exit will not be
                        called.

     Temporary file     In order to access debugging information in an
     option             optimal manner, CodePRobe creates a temporary file
                        called a "spill file" to store information for
                        quick access.  Normally this file is located in
                        ram:.  The -temp filename option opens a temporary
                        spill file called filename instead of the default
                        ram:cpr.tmp.  This option may be useful to move the
                        spill file to some other location if your system
                        has a limited amount of memory.

     Since you will probably want CodePRobe to start the debugger with the
     same options most of the time, CodePRobe allows you to create debugger
     command script files to be executed each time the debugger is invoked.
     The profile scripts are executed after the initial "go main," but
     before any commands specified with the -command option are executed.

     Profile scripts must be named profile.cpr.  CodePRobe first looks for
     a script in the s: directory and, if successful, executes it; then
     CodePRobe searches through the execution path defined by AmigaDOS.  It
     will execute only the first script encountered in the path.  (Note
     that the path always includes the current directory first and c:
     last).

     SEE

     lc, blink















     Lattice Commands                                                   C27








     cxref  Generates a cross-reference listing for C language source files
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          cxref     Generates a cross-reference listing for C language
                    source files

     SYNOPSIS

          cxref >destn source [options]

     DESCRIPTION

     This utility will take the names of files from a specified directory
     and/or drive unit path and generate a file.  The output can be
     redirected using the AmigaDOS redirection command to another file or
     device.  Where no directory is specified, the current directory is
     used.  The generated file will contain both a program listing as well
     as several cross-reference tables consisting of:

          * Pre-processor defined identifiers.
          * Functions.
          * Labels.
          * Structure identifiers.
          * Identifiers.

     With the exception of the -i option, any command line option or flag
     can be entered directly or in conjunction.  For instance the following
     are equivalent and permissible commands:

          cxref >destination source -pn

          cxref >destination source -p -n

     Flags may be specified in any order provided a flag is placed adjacent
     to its parameters, if any.  The following summarizes all of the
     available command line options for cxref.

          -ipath     Specifies the #include files to be processed for
                     listing and cross-reference.  The specified paths and
                     include directives are taken if this option is
                     followed by the appropriate command, e.g. idf0: or
                     idir1 etc.

          -lnn       Defines the length of a printed page, the default
                     being 66 lines per page.  The minimum value is 10
                     lines per page.  The syntax used is -lnn, where nn
                     represents the numeric value.

          -n         Removes all page headings - the default is to place a
                     heading on each page.

          -o         Omits any identifiers, both normal and structure.

          -p         Suppresses generation of a cross-reference report.

     Lattice Commands                                                   C28








     cxref  Generates a cross-reference listing for C language source files
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          -r         Includes any C language reserved words into the
                     cross-reference.  Selecting this option will ensure
                     that pre-processor commands and reserved keywords are
                     additionally listed.

          -wnn       Defines the width of a printed page, the default being
                     80 characters per line.  The minimum value is 60
                     characters per line, the maximum is 132 characters per
                     line.  The syntax used id -wnn, where nn represents
                     the numeric value.

          -x         Generate a cross-reference report with the program
                     listing.









































     Lattice Commands                                                   C29








     diff                      Determines the differences between two files
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          diff     Determines the differences between two files

     SYNOPSIS

          diff [-b nn] [-c] [-F nn] [-L nn] [-l nn]
               [-o file] [-p] [-q] [-w] file1 file2 ...

     DESCRIPTION

     This utility takes two specified files and reports any textual
     differences between them.  The default output is the screen, although
     the AmigaDOS redirection command is supported.

     The output file consists of three types of change blocks - append,
     change or delete.  These blocks contain the information relating to
     any differences between the two files.

     diff does provide for error message generation.  Full details of these
     is given in the main section relating to diff.

     Command line options, or flags, can be entered discretely or in
     conjunction:

          diff -pn file1 file2

     and

          diff -p -n file1 file2

     are both allowed.  Flags may be specified in any order provided a flag
     is placed adjacent to its parameters, if any.  The following
     summarizes all of the available command line options for diff.

          -bnn        This option determines the size of the I/O buffer,
                      where nn represents the number of bytes.  The default
                      I/O buffer size is 4K.

          -c          This option will display only those lines common to
                      both files.

          -Fnn        This option will determine the column position of the
                      first character for file comparison purposes.  For
                      example, setting the nn value to 25 will cause diff
                      to ignore the first 25 characters on each line.

          -Lnn        This option will determine the column position of the
                      last character for file comparison purposes.  For
                      example, setting the nn value to 75 will cause diff
                      to ignore characters beyond this column position on
                      each line.


     Lattice Commands                                                   C30








     diff                      Determines the differences between two files
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          -lnn        This option will define the number of lines per file
                      that can be handled by diff.  The default is 2000
                      lines - the maximum number of lines is limited by
                      memory availability.

          -o file     This option will direct the output to the specified
                      file or device - this is an alternative to the
                      AmigaDOS redirection command >.

          -p          This option will remove any unprintable characters
                      from the input stream.  It is identical to the -p
                      option of GREP.

          -q          This option will not output any messages when there
                      are no differences between the specified files.

          -w          This option will ignore differences related solely to
                      space or tab characters and reduce sequences of these
                      characters to one character.



































     Lattice Commands                                                   C31








     extract               Prints the names of files in specified directory
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          extract     Prints the names of files in specified directory

     SYNOPSIS

          extract [-b | -r] [-n] pattern1 pattern2

     DESCRIPTION

     This utility will take the names of files in a specified directory and
     list them to the standard output device - the screen.  The output can
     be redirected using the AmigaDOS redirection command to another file
     or device.  Where no directory is specified, the current directory is
     used.  The use of wildcard characters is supported by this utility.

     Command line options, or flags, can be entered discretely or in
     conjunction:

          extract -bn pattern1 pattern2

     and

          extract -b -n pattern1 pattern2

     are both allowed.  Flags may be specified in any order provided a flag
     is placed adjacent to its parameters, if any.  The following
     summarizes all of the available command line options for extract.

          -b     This option will not display any filename extension.

          -n     This option will not sort filenames into alphabetical
                 order before output.

          -r     This option will not display filename extensions and
                 prefixes.


















     Lattice Commands                                                   C32








     fd2pragma                                             Pragma Generator
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          fd2pragma     Pragma Generator

     SYNOPSIS

          fd2pragma infile outfile

     DESCRIPTION

     This command is used to create a file containing #pragma commands to
     allow the compiler to generate inline subroutine calls to an external
     library.

     The infile gives the complete name of the input .fd (Function
     Description) file.  This file is in the same format as supplied by
     Commodore on the Extras disk for use with AmigaBasic.

     The fd2pragma program will convert the function descriptions in the
     source .fd file into the appropriate #pragma statements for the
     compiler to generate inline calls.  Note that any subroutines
     requiring more than 4 parameters will not have #pragma statements
     generated for them because of the limitation of 4 parameters in the
     compiler.

     Any errors encountered in the infile will be reported to the console.

     SEE

     lc, lc1
























     Lattice Commands                                                   C33








     files                      Search, copy, or erase files or directories
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          files     Search, copy, or erase files or directories

     SYNOPSIS

          files [-b] [-copy dest] [-days nn] [-erase] [-n]
                [-name file/dir] [-m] [-newer file]
                [-older file] [-pat pattern] [-r] [-rerase]
                [-size nn] [-type arg] [-v] files dirs

     DESCRIPTION

     This utility permits a full range of file or directory manipulations.
     These manipulations can be either searching, copying or deletion of
     files and directories.  In addition, files supports a recursive erase
     feature which allows the deletion of an entire directory structure on
     a single command.  files also supports the AmigaDOS redirection
     command.

     The following summarizes all of the available command line options for
     files.

          -b                    This option will only output the basename
                                of files - in other words, filename
                                extensions are ignored.

          -copy destination     This option will copy files or directories
                                and associated structures to the specified
                                destination.

          -days nn              This option will display files or
                                directories modified within the last nn
                                days.

          -erase                This option will erase the specified files
                                or directories and associated structures.

          -n                    This option will not descend recursively
                                into a directory structure to copy, erase
                                or search.

          -name file/dir        This option will search for a specified
                                filename or directory.  AmigaDOS wildcards
                                are supported by this option.  This option
                                cannot be used in conjunction with the -pat
                                option.

          -m                    This option will use the DOS wildcard
                                conventions of asterisks, rather than the
                                AmigaDOS conventions of hash symbol (#) and
                                question mark (?).


     Lattice Commands                                                   C34








     files                      Search, copy, or erase files or directories
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          -newer file           This option will search for the specified
                                files which have a date stamp later than a
                                specified file.

          -older file           This option will search for the specified
                                files which have a date stamp earlier than
                                a specified file.

          -pat pattern          This option will search for a specified
                                file using a regular expression pattern
                                based on the conventions followed by GREP.
                                This option cannot be used in conjunction
                                with the -name option.

          -r                    This option will search on the root name of
                                the file - in other words, ignore any
                                filename extensions.

          -rerase               This option will erase the selected files
                                and directories.  This includes a recursive
                                descent into any subdirectories to delete
                                files and directories.

          -size bytes           This option will search for a file using
                                the specified minimum size of the file in
                                bytes as the criterion.

          -type argument        This option will search for either files or
                                directories - a d argument means a
                                directory, a f argument means a file.

          -v                    This option will echo the names of any file
                                or directory being deleted to the screen.
                                By default files does not display these
                                names to the screen.



















     Lattice Commands                                                   C35








     grep                        Global regular expression search and print
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          grep     Global regular expression search and print

     SYNOPSIS

          grep [>outfile] [-c] [-f] [-n] [-p] [-q] [-s]
               [-v] [-V] [-$] pattern file1 file2 ...

     DESCRIPTION

     Command line options, or flags, can be entered discretely or in
     conjunction:

          grep >alpha -pn beta

     and

          grep >alpha -p -n beta

     are both allowed.  Flags may be specified in any order provided a flag
     is placed adjacent to its parameters, if any.  The following
     summarizes all of the available command line options for grep.

          -c     This option will print a count of the matched lines.

          -f     This option will print the names of the files in which a
                 match of the pattern was found.

          -n     This option will turn off the numbering of matched lines -
                 the default and opposite of the UNIX convention, in that
                 each matched line is preceded by its line number when
                 displayed.

          -p     This option will filter out non-printable characters.
                 This option is useful when operating grep on AmigaDOS
                 binary files in which control characters may occur.  Only
                 the printable ASCII characters will be displayed.

          -q     This option will not display filenames or line numbers.

          -s     This option will show all filenames - normally grep will
                 display only those filenames where it has found a match
                 for the expression.  This option forces the printing of
                 filenames in which no match was found.

          -v     This option will print only the lines in which a match of
                 the pattern is not found.  This option can also be used
                 with -n, -f and -c.

          -V     This option will print the version number of grep.

          -$     This option will ignore character case distinctions.

     Lattice Commands                                                   C36








     grep                        Global regular expression search and print
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                 Normally grep distinguishes between upper and lower-case.
                 Use of this flag forces grep to ignore the distinction.
                 For example, each of int, INT, Int, INt, etc. would match
                 the pattern int if the -$ option were used.

     This version of grep is very much like the UNIX grep, but with a few
     exceptions.  A slightly less general class of patterns (regular
     expressions) is supported.  In particular, the UNIX patterns of the
     form:

          \{m\}  or  \{m,\}  or  \{m,n\}

     which match ranges of occurrences of patterns are not recognized by
     this grep.  This also applies to patterns of the form:

          \( ... \)     or     \n

     where n is a numerical, and \n is intended to match the same string of
     characters as was matched by the expression enclosed between \( and
     \).

     Aside from these departures, this grep has all the features of the
     UNIX grep.  In particular:

      1.  An ordinary character is a one-character pattern which matches
          itself.

      2.  A backslash (\) followed by any special character is a
          one-character pattern which matches the special character itself,
          except when it is used in an escape sequence for a non-graphic
          character as described below.  The special characters are:

               \    .    *    [    ,

          Unlike UNIX, the characters:

               .    *    \

          remain special even within square brackets, although [ does not.

          ^ which is special at the beginning of an entire pattern.

          $ which is special at the end of an entire pattern (see below).

          ! which is special immediately following a left bracket [ (see
            below).

      3.  A period (.) is a one-character pattern that matches any
          character except newline or end-of-string.

      4.  A non-empty string of characters enclosed in square brackets [ ]
          is a one-character pattern which matches any one character in
          that string.  However, if the first character of the string is !

     Lattice Commands                                                   C37








     grep                        Global regular expression search and print
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          then the one-character pattern matches any character except
          newline or end-of-string and the remaining characters in the
          string.  Thus ! is a not sign applied to a character class.  Note
          that this is a notational departure from UNIX, which uses ^ for
          this application (thus rendering ^ ambiguous).

      5.  Also supported are such character classes as:

               [a-z]

          indicating all of the letters a to z.  The only restriction in
          such cases is that the first character must occur alphabetically
          prior to the second.

      6.  grep recognizes certain non-graphic characters denoted in the
          manner of Kernighan & Ritchie.  In particular, the expression on
          the left below may be used to denote a pattern which is matched
          by the character described on the right:

          \n       newline

          \t       tab

          \b       backspace

          \r       carriage return

          \\       backslash

          \xmn     character whose hexadecimal number is denoted by the
                   hexadecimal numerals m and n (in sequence).

      7.  Patterns containing white space (spaces and tabs) may be
          specified to grep by enclosing them in double quotation marks
          (" ").  Thus a string may be grepped by:

               grep "this is a string" foo.c

          The manner in which the command line given to AmigaDOS determines
          the behavior of grep.  Thus, any tab in the command line will
          remain a tab when parsed by grep - it will not be converted to
          spaces.  Spaces, in addition to any combination of tabs and
          spaces, will be passed unchanged to grep from the command line.
          It is also acceptable to use the escaped form of the tab
          character \t, inside a quoted string passed to grep.  If it is
          necessary for grep to parse an expression containing the double
          quote itself, this character should be escaped with the backslash
          as shown in the following example:

               grep "this : \" is a double quote" foo.c

      8.  If r is a pattern, then:


     Lattice Commands                                                   C38








     grep                        Global regular expression search and print
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

               r*

          matches zero or more occurrences of r.  If there is a choice,
          then the longest leftmost string that matches r is chosen.

      9.  If r is a pattern, then:

               r+

          matches one or more occurrences of r.  If there is a choice, then
          the longest leftmost string which matches r is chosen.

     10.  The concatenation of patterns is a pattern which matches the
          concatenation of the strings matched by each component of the
          pattern.

     Output from grep may be redirected to a file by using:

          >filename

     as the first command-line argument to grep, where filename refers to
     the name of the desired output file.

     Files to be searched may be specified to grep in any manner understood
     by AmigaDOS.  The AmigaDOS wildcard patterns are enumerated in The
     AmigaDOS Manual under the list command and can be used to specify
     groups of files to be searched.  Refer to Appendix C for details of
     The AmigaDOS Manual.  For example:

          df0:#?.c     Matches all files on drive df0: with a .c file
                       extension.

          g#?.c        Matches all files in the current directory with
                       extension .c, beginning with g.

     Any of the file specifications to grep can also be combined, such as:

          #?.c  s/#?.c     Matches all files both in the current directory
                           and in the subdirectory s/, with a .c extension.

     SEE

     grep Libraries.











     Lattice Commands                                                   C39








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lc     Lattice C Compiler

     SYNOPSIS

          assign LC: executable path
          assign INCLUDE: include path
          assign LIB: library path
          assign QUAD: quad path

          lc options files

     DESCRIPTION

     The normal method for executing the Lattice C Compiler is to invoke
     the lc command.  The assign statements in the synopsis are options.
     The lc program separates the options list into those for pass 1 and
     those for pass 2.  Then it executes lc1 (pass 1) and lc2 (pass 2) for
     each of the C source files specified by the files list.  This list can
     consist of one or more file names and/or file patterns, separated by
     white space.  For example:

          lc #? :mydir/myprog :mydir/abc?

     will compile all C source files in the current directory, plus the
     source file named :mydir/myprog.c plus all C programs in the :mydir
     directory which have four-character names beginning with abc.  Note
     that the lc command automatically supplies the .C extension on all
     source file names.

     The LC command will also automatically invoke the librarian and linker
     if required.

     This command utilizes the logical name assignment feature of AmigaDOS
     to locate the various programs and files.  These assignments allow
     these programs and files to be located in any directory on any disk.

     The options list can contain any combination of the following,
     separated by blanks:

     -a     This option specifies that the sections designated by the
            characters which immediately follow are to be loaded into
            memory addressable by the Amiga's custom hardware.  This is
            necessary for screen image and audio data.  This option is
            synonymous with the -c option for lc2.  The -a option must be
            immediately followed by one or more of the following letters in
            any order:

            b     bss or uninitialized data

            c     code segment


     Lattice Commands                                                   C40








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

            d     data segment

            The default action is to load the segments into memory not
            addressable by the custom hardware if it is available.  This is
            generally desirable because it avoids bus contention between
            the processor and the custom hardware.  Image and audio data
            must be loaded into memory accessible by the custom hardware.
            For example:

                 -acdb

            will cause all segments to be loaded into chip addressable
            memory, regardless of the system memory configuration.

            Note that this option is superseded by the new chip keyword
            supported in LC1.  When used with the LC program it will
            automatically specify -b0 to override the -b1 default.  By
            changing existing code to use the chip keyword, you will be
            able to use the improved code quality offered by the -b1
            option.

     -b     This option causes the compiler to change the form of
            addressing used to locate statics, externals and strings.  By
            default, -b1 is used to imply that all such items are addressed
            as a 16 bit offset from address register A4.  The disadvantage
            of this is that it only allows for 64K bytes of data that can
            be addressed and all such data must be in the same hunk.  You
            can override this option by using the -b0 option which implies
            full 32 bit addressing for accessing all items.

            Note that this option does not limit the amount of data that
            may be allocated at run time.

            When using the -a option of LC, you must specify -b0 in order
            to access any statics and externs declared in a module compiled
            with the -a option.  In order to eliminate the requirement for
            the -b0 option, you can utilize the chip keyword on those
            objects that are to be placed into chip memory.

            This option now is passed to LC1 instead of LC2 where it
            actually causes the compiler to change the default storage
            class of externs to "far" or "near" as appropriate.  If you
            have a program which has a large amount of data, you can
            readily use the -b1 default by putting the "far" keyword on any
            large objects to move them out of this common merged data
            section.

     -C     This option causes the LC command to continue with the next
            source file when a fatal compilation error is reported while
            multiple source files are being compiled.  Normally, a fatal
            error causes the process to pause with the following message
            displayed on your screen:


     Lattice Commands                                                   C41








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                 Compiler return code xx.
                 Press Y to abort, any other key to continue.

            The compiler error messages are also displayed immediately
            above this prompter.  If you respond with a 'Y' (yes), LC will
            abort, otherwise it will proceed to the next source file.

     -c     The compiler defaults to compatibility with previous releases
            with many ANSI C language features, but the -c compatibility
            option can be used to activate some important features as well
            as compatibility with other compilers.  The -c must be
            immediately followed by one or more letters from the following
            list, in any order.  We recommend that you use the options
            -cusf for the best code generation and error reporting.

            +     Compatibility mode for the Lattice C++ product.  This
                  will suppress warnings associated with structure passing
                  and other potential problem areas that will have already
                  been diagnosed by the C++ front end.

            a     Enables full ANSI compatibility mode with full
                  diagnostics to check for portability problems.  Some
                  features of the compiler are disabled when this option is
                  specified such as precompiled header files and
                  suppressing multiple includes of the same file in order
                  to achieve compliance.

            c     Allows comments to be nested.

            d     Allows $ character to be used in identifiers.

            e     Suppresses the printing of the error source line in
                  conjunction with any warnings or errors.

            f     Forces the compiler to check for the presence of function
                  prototypes and to complain when one isn't present at a
                  function call or function definition.

            i     Suppresses multiple #includes of the same file.  If a
                  second #include of the same file is encountered, the
                  directive is simply ignored.  Note that case is important
                  although no distinction is made for angle brackets or
                  quotes.  This option is implied when precompiled header
                  files are used or created.

            k     Enables the presence of the chip, near and far keywords
                  even when the -ca option has been specified.

            m     Allows use of multiple character constants (e.g. 'ab')

            o     Provides a compatibility mode to use the pre-ANSI style
                  preprocessor found in previous releases of the compiler.
                  The most important aspect of this occurs in substitution

     Lattice Commands                                                   C42








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                  of symbols within quoted strings.

            r     Enables registerized parameter passing based on function
                  prototypes and definitions.

            s     Causes the compiler to generate a single copy of all
                  identical string constants into the code section of the
                  program.  Note that when this option is specified,
                  modification of any string constants at runtime will
                  produce unpredictable results.

            t     Enables warning messages for structure and union tags
                  that are used without being defined.  For example:

                       struct XYZ *p;

                  would not normally produce a warning message if structure
                  tag XYZ were not defined.

            u     Forces all char declarations to be treated as unsigned
                  char.

            w     Shuts off warning messages generated for return
                  statements which do not specify a return value within an
                  int function.  By the ANSI standard, all such functions
                  should be declared as void instead of int.

            x     Causes all global data declarations to be treated as
                  externals.  This is identical to specifying the -x
                  option.

     -d     This option has two uses.  When used by itself or immediately
            followed by a numeric digit, it activates the debugging mode.
            Currently, the following debugging options are supported:

            -d0     Disables all debugging information

            -d1     Enables output of the line number/offset table

            -d      Same as -d1

            -d2     Outputs full debugging information for only those
                    symbols and structures referenced by the program.

            -d3     Outputs full debugging information for only those
                    symbols and structures referenced by the program.
                    Additionally it will cause the code generator to flush
                    all registers at line boundaries.

            -d4     Outputs full debugging information for all symbols and
                    structures declared in the program even if there is no
                    reference to them.


     Lattice Commands                                                   C43








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

            -d5     Outputs full debugging information for all symbols and
                    structures declared in the program even if there is no
                    reference to them.  Additionally it will cause the code
                    generator to flush all registers at line boundaries.

            When any of the debugging options is specified, the
            preprocessor symbol DEBUG will be defined so any debugging
            statements in the source file will be compiled.

            The -d option can also be used to define preprocessor symbols
            in the following ways.

            -dsymbol           Causes symbol to be defined as if your
                               source file had the statement:

                                    #define symbol

            -dsymbol=value     Causes symbol to be defined as if your
                               source file had the statement:

                                    #define symbol value

     -e     This option causes the compiler to recognize the extended
            character set used in Asian-language applications.  Note that
            this option has no validity on the current generation of
            hardware running v1.2 or v1.3 of the system software.

     -f     This option controls the format to be used for all floating
            point operations.  Currently four basic styles of floating
            point are supported:

            -fl     Standard Lattice IEEE routines linked into the program
                    to perform software emulation of all floating point
                    operations.  This code will work on all machines but
                    will not take advantage of a 68881 if present.  This
                    option is the default for compatibility with previous
                    version, of the compiler.

            -ff     Motorola Fast Floating Point (FFP) format for all
                    floating point operations.  The resulting object module
                    must be linked with the FFP math library lcmffp.lib.
                    In order for code compiled with this option to run, the
                    user must have mathffp.library in the libs: directory.
                    While these routines are slightly faster than standard
                    IEEE routines, they operate with much less precision.
                    These routines will not benefit from the presence of a
                    68881.

            -fi     Amiga IEEE routines located at run time.  In order for
                    code compiled with this option to execute, the user
                    must have mathieeedoubbas.library in the libs:
                    directory.  While the overhead of calling the library
                    is slightly greater for the software emulation, the

     Lattice Commands                                                   C44








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                    presence of a 68881 will be detected by and used by the
                    library supplied with the 68881 board.  We recommend
                    that you use this option for any math intensive
                    application.

            -f8     Inline Motorola 68881 generated instructions using the
                    co-processor interface.  Code compiled with this option
                    will not operate unless a 68881 is installed which
                    conforms to this interface.  This generally implies the
                    presence of a 68020/68030 processor as the 68000 does
                    not support such an interface.  While this provides the
                    absolutely fastest form of floating point calculations,
                    the number of target machines supported is quite
                    limited.

                    One important note:  If you are attempting to run two
                    programs at the same time compiled with this option and
                    they produce incorrect or inconsistent results, there
                    may be a problem with the board not correctly hooking
                    into the task switch/launch facilities.  To date, we
                    know that the Commodore supplied board does conform to
                    such specifications.

            In addition to the floating point styles, the compiler allows
            some control over the precision attributed to the float and
            double declarations used within the user code.

            -fs     Causes the compiler to treat all declarations as single
                    precision.  This is the only mode allowed with the FFP
                    format and is optional for all others.

            -fd     Causes the compiler to treat all declarations as double
                    -precision.  This is illegal in conjunction with the
                    FFP format.

            -fm     Causes the compiler to treat float as single precision
                    and double as double precision.  This option is the
                    default for all formats except FFP (which is illegal
                    with this option).

            -f      Will reset to the default of Lattice IEEE mixed mode.
                    If you specify both a floating point style and a
                    precision, it must be done on the same -f option such
                    as in -fim or -ffs.

     -g     This option causes the big version of LC1 to generate a cross
            reference and listing file.  LC will automatically invoke this
            version of the compiler if the option is specified.  The -g
            option is followed by one or more of the following option
            letters in any order:

            c     Outputs a cross reference of all compiler provided
                  include files found by searching the include: directory.

     Lattice Commands                                                   C45








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                  By default these symbols are not printed.

            d     Includes all #define symbols in the cross reference
                  listing.

            e     Causes the source listing to display all excluded lines
                  as controlled by #if or #ifdef.  Normally these lines are
                  not displayed.

            h     Includes the contents of all include files found in the
                  include: directory as they were included by the source
                  program.  Normally, only the #include directive causing
                  the compiler to read the file is displayed.

            i     Includes the contents of all user provided include files
                  in the expanded listing.

            m     Displays both the original source line and the line after
                  macro expansion in the listing.  This is useful for
                  tracking down problems related to preprocessor
                  replacement of symbols.

            n     Toggles the narrow mode of the listing.  By default, the
                  listing will be formatted for a 108 column line with most
                  lines not exceeding 80 characters.  When enabled, this
                  option allows for listing lines up to 132 characters.

            s     Toggles listing of the input source code.

            x     Toggles generation of a cross reference of the symbols
                  encountered in the source file.

     -h     This option specifies that the sections designated by the
            characters which immediately follow are to be loaded into
            memory not addressable by the Amiga's custom hardware.  The -h
            option must be immediately followed by one or more of the
            following letters in any order:

            b     bss or uninitialized data

            c     code segment

            d     data segment

            The default action is to load the segments into memory not
            addressable by the custom hardware if possible.  This option
            prevents the specified segments from being loaded into chip
            addressable memory even if no other memory is available.  This
            can cause programs to not execute if external high-speed memory
            is not available on the machine.  As an example:

                 -hcdb


     Lattice Commands                                                   C46








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

            would cause all three sections to be loaded only in high-speed
            ram.

     -H     This option specifies that the compiler is to preload the
            symbol table from a precompiled header file.  It is immediately
            followed by the name of the precompiled header file as in:

                 -Hinclude:all.sym  -Hall.sym

            There is no limit to the number of precompiled header files
            that may be read in.

     -i     This option specifies a directory that the compiler should
            search when it is attempting to find an include file.  For
            example, if you specify the option as -idf0:headers -idf1:local
            and then place the line:

                 #include "defs.h"

            in your source program, the compiler first tries to find the
            header file names defs.h in the current directory.  If it is
            not there, then the compiler searches for df0:headers/defs.h
            and df1:local/defs.h in this order.  Finally, if these attempts
            fail, the compiler will attempt to open include:defs.h.

            Note that you can place up to 16 -i options on the command
            line.

            If the file had been enclosed in angle brackets:

                 #include <defs.h>

            Then the compiler will attempt to open include:defs.h followed
            by defs.h in the current directory, followed by the -i
            specifications.

     -j     This option allows control over the error messages reported by
            the compiler.  It is immediately followed by a number and then
            an optional letter:

            -j<n>      Causes the compiler to suppress printing of warning
                       number <n>.

            -j<n>e     Causes the compiler to treat any occurences of
                       warning <n> as an error instead.

            -j<n>i     Causes the compiler to suppress printing of warning
                       number <n>.

            -j<n>w     Enables printing of warning <n>.  By default,
                       several ANSI oriented messages are disabled.

            Several messages may be affected with the same -j option such

     Lattice Commands                                                   C47








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

            as -j22i30e132w which disables warning message #22, turns #30
            into an error and enables #132 as a warning.

     -L     When this option is present, lc invokes the linker if all
            compilations are successful.  The first source file name is
            used as the name of the executable and map files produced by
            the linker.  Any other files that were compiled are supplied to
            the linker as secondary object files.  The Lattice C startup
            routine is included as the first object module.

            The linker is instructed to search the standard Lattice library
            file lc.lib and the standard Amiga library file amiga.lib.

            Additional Lattice libraries and linker options may be
            specified by immediately following the -L option with one or
            more of the following letters:

            a     This invokes the ADDSYM option of the linker.  It causes
                  debugging information for all routines to be output the
                  executable file.

            n     This invokes the NODEBUG option of the linker.  It causes
                  all debugging information to be stripped from the final
                  executable.

            t     This selects the typical linker options we recommend for
                  producing small code.  It currently selects SMALLCODE
                  SMALLDATA NODEBUG.

            c     This invokes the SMALLCODE option of the linker.  It
                  causes all code hunks to be combined into a single code
                  hunk.

            d     This invokes the SMALLDATA option of the linker.  It
                  causes all data and bss hunks to be combined into the
                  single data hunk that is referenced by modules compiled
                  with the -b option.

            f     This letter specifies that the Motorola FFP math library
                  lcmffp.lib is to be searched before the standard run-time
                  support library.

            h     This letter directs the linker to output the hunk portion
                  of the map.  This is the default map if no other map
                  options are specified.

            l     This letter directs the linker to include library
                  information in the map file.

            m     This letter specifies that the Lattice IEEE math library
                  lcm.lib is to be searched before the standard run-time
                  support library.


     Lattice Commands                                                   C48








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

            o     This directs the linker to include overlay information in
                  the map file.

            s     This letter directs the linker to produce a symbol
                  listing in the map file.

            v     This invokes the VERBOSE option of the linker.  It causes
                  the linker to display statistical messages as it is
                  processing the object files and libraries.

            x     This directs the linker to include cross reference
                  information in the map file.

            For example, -Lm will search lcm.lib before lc.lib and
            amiga.lib, and -Lvf will search lcmffp.lib, lc.lib, and
            amiga.lib, and display messages regarding the current linker
            status.  Note that the math library options are mutually
            exclusive, and that the standard libraries are always searched
            last.

            If you want to search other libraries, you must list those
            libraries after the letters options, and use plus signs as
            separators.  For example, -L+myfuncs.lib searches myfuncs.lib
            before the standard Lattice and Amiga libraries, while
            -Lm+myfuncs.lib+:george/myfuncs.lib searches the libraries
            myfuncs.lib, :george/myfuncs.lib, lcm.lib, lc.lib, and
            amiga.lib.  Note that the special libraries are searched before
            the Lattice libraries.

            The -L option creates a file in the current directory named
            xxx.lnk, where xxx is the name of the first source file to be
            compiled (i.e., the same name that is used for the executable
            and map files).  This .LNK file serves as input to the linker,
            and it is not deleted at the end of the procedure.  This allows
            you to easily re-link if, during your testing, you find a need
            to change and re-compile only one module.  To do this, simply
            execute the linker utility blink in the following way:

                 blink WITH xxx.lnk

            where xxx.lnk is the name of the .LNK file previously produced
            by the lc command.

     -l     This option causes all objects except characters, short
            integers, and structures that contain only characters and short
            integers to be aligned on longword boundaries (i.e., addresses
            evenly divisible by 4).  Structures will be longword aligned if
            they contain any members that must be aligned.

            Note that this option is incompatible with any of the Amiga
            Exec structures which do not conform to this alignment
            requirements.  Attempting to call an Amiga system routine with
            such misaligned structures will produce unpredictable results

     Lattice Commands                                                   C49








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

            and a very likely visit to the GURU.

     -M     When this option is present, lc will compile only those source
            files with dates more recent than the corresponding object
            files.  Note that the dates of included files are not checked.
            In other words, if you change a header file without changing
            the source file that includes it, the source file will not
            automatically re-compile because it still pre-dates its object
            file.

            For larger projects where there is a more intense dependency
            upon structures in common data files being changed, we
            recommend using a make utility such as LMK to manage
            recompilation of the affected source files automatically.

     -m     This option allows control of the type of code generated.  The
            -m must be immediately followed by one or more letters from the
            following list in any order:

            0     Causes the compiler to generate code which will run on a
                  Motorola 68000 found in most Amigas.  Decisions on code
                  optimization will be based on the timings for this
                  processor.

            1     Causes the compiler to generate code which will run on a
                  Motorola 68010.  Decisions on code optimization will be
                  based on the timings for this processor.  In general,
                  code for this will run on a 68000 although the 68010 has
                  instructions not found on the 68000.

            2     Causes the compiler to generate code optimized for the
                  68020 processor.  This code will not run on a 68010 or
                  68000 although it will run on a 68030.

            3     Causes the compiler to generate code optimized for the
                  68030 processor.  This code will not run on a 68010 or
                  68000 although it will work on a 68020.

            a     Causes the compiler to generate code to run on any
                  Motorola 680x0 family processor.  Code is optimized for
                  the 68010/68020 only when it does degrade performance for
                  a 68000.

            c     Disables the CORE deferred stack cleanup optimization
                  which leaves parameters on the stack after a call to be
                  reused and cleaned up by a subsequent subroutine call or
                  return statement.

            r     Disables the automatic registerization of variables.  By
                  default, the compiler will attempt to pick likely
                  candidates for register variables.

            s     Causes the compiler to choose optimizations which result

     Lattice Commands                                                   C50








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                  in a reduction of space instead of time.

            t     Causes the compiler to choose optimizations which result
                  in a performance increase at the cost of code space.
                  This is the default.

     -n     This option causes the compiler to retain only 8 characters for
            all identifiers.  The default maximum identifier length is 31
            characters.  In either case, anything beyond the maximum length
            is ignored.

     -O     This option invokes the global optimizer.

     -o     This option should be followed by the drive, directory, or
            complete file name for the object file that is produced by pass
            2.  Several examples are:

            -odf0:          Places the object file in the root directory on
                            drive df0:.

            -o:obj/         Places the object file into directory obj/ on
                            the current drive.  The name of the file is the
                            same as the source file name, with a .O
                            extension instead of .C.

            -ospecial.o     Places the object file into the current
                            directory with the name special.o.

     -p     This option is used when using the compiler in a preprocessor
            mode to produce a file used by subsequent compiler invocations.
            When this option is used, the compiler will not create a quad
            file.  However, the file specified as the -o option will be
            used as the target name for the created file.  There are
            several uses for the -p option:

            -p      by itself causes the compiler to write the results of
                    preprocessing the input source file into the output
                    file.  If no output file is specified, a file extension
                    of .p will be used to create the file.

            -ph     Causes the compiler to generate a precompiled header
                    file containing a dump of all symbols encountered in
                    the given source file.  This file may then be used for
                    the -H option on subsequent compiler invocations to
                    reduce compilation time.

            -pr     Causes the compiler to generate a prototype file
                    containing prototypes for all functions defined in the
                    source file.  The -pr may be immediately followed by
                    one or more of the following option letters in any
                    order:

                    e     Eliminates prototypes for all static functions.

     Lattice Commands                                                   C51








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                          Only those functions available externally will
                          have prototypes generated for them.

                    p     Causes the compiler to generate prototypes with
                          __PARMS for portability to other compilers.

                    s     Generates prototypes for all static functions.
                          Only those functions defined with the static
                          function will be output.

                    Note that -pres will not generate any prototypes.

     -q     This option has two uses.  If the -q is immediately followed by
            a letter, it specifies where the quad file is to be generated.
            Otherwise it is used to control how many errors/warnings will
            be allowed before quitting a compilation.

            This option should be followed by the drive, directory, or
            complete file name for the quad file, which is the intermediate
            file generated by pass 1 and read by pass 2.  Several examples
            are:

            -qram:       Places the quad file in ram disk.

            -qdf0:       Places the quad file in the root directory of
                         drive df0:.

            -q:quad/     Places the quad file into directory quad/ on the
                         current drive.  The name of the file is the same
                         as the source file name, with a .Q extension
                         instead of .C.

            Note that the quad file is automatically deleted after pass 1.
            If you do not want this to happen, call the lc1 command
            directly.

            To control the maximum number of errors/warnings, the -q should
            be immediately followed by a number then either an e or w.  For
            example:

            -q3w        Quit after 3 warnings or errors.

            -q2e        Quit after 2 errors.

            -q10w1e     Quit after 10 warnings or any errors.

            -q          Quit after any errors or warnings.

            Note that when the compiler quits due to too many
            errors/warnings, it will not generate a quad file.

     -r     This option is used to control how the compiler is to generate
            subroutine calls and entries.  The -r option may be followed by

     Lattice Commands                                                   C52








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

            one or more of the following characters in any order:

            0     Defaults all subroutine calls to "far" which means that
                  the compiler will use an absolute 32-bit relocated
                  address to locate the target function.  Note that any
                  functions explicitly declared "near" will use the more
                  efficient 16-bit relative offset.

            1     (The compiler default) Causes all subroutine calls to be
                  defaulted to "near" which means that the compiler will
                  use a 16-bit PC relative address to locate the target
                  function.  In order for this to work, the target
                  subroutine must be with +/-32K of the generated
                  instruction.  If it is not within range, the linker will
                  generate an ALV to allow the call to be bridged to the
                  final target.  Any functions explicitly declared "far"
                  will use the larger 32-bit address.

            r     Causes the compiler to use registerized parameters for
                  all subroutine calls and entry points.  The first two
                  integral and two pointer items will be loaded into
                  d0-d1/a0-a1 for the call.  Any function without a
                  prototype or explicitly declared _stdargs will use the
                  normal stack conventions.

            s     (The compiler default) Causes the computer to use
                  standard stack parameters for all subroutine calls.
                  Those functions explicitly declared _regargs will use the
                  registerized parameter conventions.

            b     Defaults the compiler to use registerized parameters for
                  all subroutine calls, yet still generate a prologue that
                  handles both styles of parameter passing.

     -R     When this option is specified, the object modules produced by
            the compiler are automatically inserted into a library file,
            replacing modules of the same names.  The option must be
            followed by the name of the library, as in

                 -Rmylib.lib

            which places the object modules into the mylib.lib library
            file.  The -R can be followed by any valid file name, including
            drive code and path.  A .lib extension is not automatically
            supplied.

     -s     This option allows you to change the default hunk or segment
            names generated by the compiler.  If it is not present, the
            hunks are unnamed.  You can use this option to provide hunk
            names as follows:

            -s               This causes the compiler to use the default
                             names of text for the program section, data

     Lattice Commands                                                   C53








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                             for the data section, and udata for the bss or
                             uninitialized data section.

            -sc=codename     Causes the compiler to use the name codename
                             for the program, or code, section without
                             affecting the names of the other sections.

            -sd=dataname     Causes the compiler to use the name dataname
                             for the data section without affecting the
                             names of the other sections.

            -sb=bssname      Causes the compiler to use the name bssname
                             for the bss, or uninitialized data, section
                             without affecting the names of the other
                             sections.

     -u     This option by itself undefines all preprocessor symbols which
            are normally pre-defined by the compiler.

     -v     This option disables the generation of stack checking code at
            the beginning of each function.

     -w     This option causes the compiler to treat all integers as 16-bit
            short values.  It is intended to provide compatibility with
            other compilers although it does provide a marginal increase in
            performance of the generated code.  When using this option, we
            strongly recommend use of prototypes to catch parameter
            mismatch errors as not all parameters will be promoted to 4
            bytes as is the default.

     -x     This option causes all global data declarations to be treated
            as externals.  This can be useful if you define data in a
            header file that is included by multiple source files.  The -x
            option can be used with all the files except one, in this case,
            to cause the data items to be defined in one module and
            referenced as externals in the others.

     -y     This option causes each function entry sequence to load address
            register A4 with the value of the linker defined symbol
            LinkerDB.  This symbol is the data section base address, biased
            as necessary.  This option must be used if the -b1 option is
            used with interrupt code or functions that will be multi-tasked
            with the AddTask() function.  Note that in general only the
            functions that can be used as entry points to the task or
            interrupt handler need to use this feature, since register A4
            will be propagated by subsequent function calls.

            This option is superseded by the __saveds option keyword that
            may by used with a function.  Any function having this keyword
            will automatically load up the base register upon entry.

     RETURNS


     Lattice Commands                                                   C54








     lc                                                  Lattice C Compiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     The LC command returns the following completion codes:

     0     The compilations were successful.  That is, at least one program
           was compiled, and there were no fatal errors.

     1     One or more fatal compilation errors were reported.

     2     No source files were found.

     SEE

     lc1, lc2, blink

     EXAMPLE

     The first command assigns the INCLUDE logical name so that header
     files will be found in the df0:include directory.  The second command
     assigns the LC logical name so that the driver program can find the
     executables in the df0:c directory.  The next command assigns the LIB
     logical name so that the driver program can tell the linker to locate
     the standard library files in the df0:lib directory.  The next command
     compiles all modules in the mylib subdirectory and then constructs a
     library named mylib.lib if all compilations are successful.  The last
     command compiles myprog.c and links it with mylib.lib to produce a
     load module named myprog.

          lc  -Rmylib mylib/#?
          lc -mp -L+mylib myprog


























     Lattice Commands                                                   C55








     lc1                                                    Compiler pass 1
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lc1      Compiler pass 1
          lc1b     Big compiler pass 1

     SYNOPSIS

          lc1 options file
          lc1b options file

     DESCRIPTION

     lc1 and lc1b commands invoke the first compiler pass, which reads a
     source file and translates it into an intermediate form known as a
     quad file.  lc1b invokes the big compiler for cross referencing and
     prototyping purposes.  lc1b will be invoked automatically if the -g
     option and the prototyping options are used.  Unlike the lc command,
     you can only specify one source file to lc1, and it should be written
     without the .C extension.  For example, if the file argument is
     myprog, this pass will translate myprog.c into the quad file named
     myprog.q.

     The options argument can consist of the following items, which are
     described in the lc command:

     -b     Base register relative data addressing.

     -c     Compiler compatibility settings.

     -d     Debugging mode or preprocessor symbol definition.

     -e     Extended character set processing.

     -f     Floating point format selection.

     -g     Listing generation options.  This is only valid with the lc1b
            command.

     -h     Precompiled header file inclusion.

     -i     Directory paths for local include files.

     -j     Error/warning message control.

     -l     Longword alignment of data items.

     -n     Long symbol names.

     -o     Specify destination for .Q file.  Note that this option is
            specified as -q on the lc command.

     -p     Preprocessor options.


     Lattice Commands                                                   C56








     lc1                                                    Compiler pass 1
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     -q     Compilation error abort control.

     -r     Subroutine call control.  This option was an option for the lc2
            command in previous versions of the compiler.

     -u     Undefine preprocessor symbols.

     -w     Generate code to use short integers.

     -x     Treat all global declarations as externals.

     All options must appear before the file name.

     SEE

     lc, lc2






































     Lattice Commands                                                   C57








     lc2                                            Compiler code generator
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lc2     Compiler code generator

     SYNOPSIS

          lc2 options file

     DESCRIPTION

     This command invokes the second compiler pass, which reads a quad file
     and translates it into an object file.  Note that you can specify one
     quad file to lc2, and it should be written without the .Q extension.
     For example, if the file argument is myprog, this pass will translate
     myprog.q to myprog.o.

     The options argument can consist of the following terms, which are
     described in the lc command:

     -c     Chip memory specification.  This is the same as the -a option
            on the lc command.

     -h     Fast memory specification.

     -o     Specify destination for .O file.

     -s     Specify segment time.

     -v     Disable stack checking.

     -y     Unconditionally load the base register.

     All options must appear before the file name.

     SEE

     lc, lc1

















     Lattice Commands                                                   C58








     lcompact                                        Header file compressor
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lcompact     Header file compressor

     SYNOPSIS

          lcompact <infile >outfile

     DESCRIPTION

     This command is used to create a compressed version of a header file
     that may be processed by the compiler faster.

     By default, lcompact reads from the standard input file and writes to
     standard output.  To cause it to read from a given file, you must use
     the AmigaDOS redirection character < as in <infile.  If you do not do
     this, it will read all input from the CLI window until an EOF ^\ is
     encountered.

     The result may be placed into a file by redirecting the standard
     output with the AmigaDOS redirection character > as in >outfile.  If
     you do not specify a redirection, the output will be displayed on the
     CLI window.  Since this is binary coded data, the output will not be
     very intelligible.

     The lcompact command compresses a file by performing four basic
     operations:

     Compression        Multiple blanks and meaningless blank characters
                        are removed.  Expressions are analyzed according to
                        standard C precedence rules to determine which are
                        safe to remove.

     Elimination        All comments and unnecessary blank lines are
                        removed.

     Transformation     Certain sequences such as hex constants are
                        converted into more efficient representations.  For
                        example, 0x0000001 is transformed into 1.  These
                        transformations take place only if the secondary
                        representation is more space efficient.

     Tokenization       A limited number of common keywords are reduced to
                        a single token character with the high order bit
                        set.  This fixed set of keywords is known to the
                        compiler and will be automatically expanded as they
                        are encountered.

     The end result of compacting a header file is anywhere between 20% and
     75% smaller depending upon the original contents.  The compiler will
     automatically expand the header file on input so that error messages
     will print out the original line (without comments) for a diagnostic.


     Lattice Commands                                                   C59








     lcompact                                        Header file compressor
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     SEE

     lc1



















































     Lattice Commands                                                   C60








     lmk                   Maintain and update records of file dependencies
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lmk     Maintain and update records of file dependencies

     SYNOPSIS

          lmk [options] [macro definitions] [targets]

     DESCRIPTION

     lmk, a descendant of the UNIX make utility, is a tool for maintaining
     file dependency relations and aids in performing the minimal necessary
     actions in order to remake specified targets.

     The basic operation of lmk is to:

          * Locate and identify the target file in the lmk or description
            file.
          * Ensure that any file on which the target file depends,
            including any file needed to create the target file, already
            exist and are up to date.
          * Create the target file if any of the dependent files have been
            modified more recently than the target file.

     In this context, a basic description of these terms is:

          dependent file     This file is the basic unit of the lmk
                             structure.  Such a file could be a source code
                             file, header file or object code file.  The
                             dependent file is the file needed to create a
                             target file, i.e. if a dependent file is
                             changed (for example, by editing), then the
                             target file must be rebuilt.

          lmk file           This file contains the names of every file
                             which are required to create the target file.
                             This file also contains details of the actions
                             necessary to create the target file.  These
                             actions can be such things as directory
                             locations, compile or linking sequences of the
                             dependent files, as well as basic housekeeping
                             commands.

          target file        This is the file which is the end result of an
                             lmk session.  In other words, any file that is
                             created or updated by lmk.

     Command line options, or flags, can be entered discretely or in
     conjunction:

          lmk -pn

     and

     Lattice Commands                                                   C61








     lmk                   Maintain and update records of file dependencies
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          lmk -p -n

     are both allowed.  Flags may be specified in any order provided a flag
     is placed adjacent to its parameters, if any.  The following
     summarizes all of the available command line options for lmk.

          -a          This option will rebuild all targets without regard
                      to time stamps.  This forces all targets and
                      sub-targets to be rebuilt.

          -b file     This option will use the filename following this flag
                      as the default file, rather than the file named
                      lmk.def.

          -c          This option will create a batch file from this lmk
                      session.  The batch file will be passed for execution
                      with the command execute lmkfile.bat.  The file
                      lmkfile.bat will be left in the current directory
                      given a history of the actions and responses of the
                      lmk session.

          -d          This option will print out detailed debugging
                      information about the processing of the lmkfile.

          -e          This option will erase any out-of-date targets before
                      remaking them.

          -f name     This option will use the filename following this flag
                      as the input lmkfile.

          -h          This option will print out help information and then
                      exit.

          -i          This option will ignore error returns from actions.

          -k          This option will ignore error returns from actions
                      passed to AmigaDOS.  Also, ignores error returns
                      stemming from lmk not knowing how to make certain
                      targets.

          -n          This option will display the actions lmk would have
                      taken onto the screen, but will not execute these
                      actions.

          -p          This option will print out target descriptions and
                      expanded macros.

          -q          This option will query if the target file is updated.
                      Prints a 1 if the target is currently up to date or a
                      0 if it is not.  lmk will not take any of the
                      associated actions.

          -s          This option will not echo actions to the screen

     Lattice Commands                                                   C62








     lmk                   Maintain and update records of file dependencies
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                      before executing them.

          -t          This option will Touch the target files by updating
                      them with the current system time.  None of the
                      actions usually associated with making these targets
                      will be performed.

          -u          This option will rebuild unconditionally all targets
                      without regard to time stamps.  This will force
                      everything (all targets and sub-targets) to be
                      rebuilt.

          -x          This option is the UNIX compatibility flag.

     lmk is based upon a rule structure which can be extended and
     customized.  lmk allows the substitution of repetitive character
     strings into macros and provides internally defined or default macros.
     These macros are subject to certain rules within lmk.  Refer to the
     section dealing with lmk for full details of macros and the rule
     structure.  In addition, there are certain characters which are part
     of the rule structure of lmk, or have a special meaning.  The special
     characters are:

          -     The minus symbol (-) causes lmk to continue processing even
                after an error condition has been encountered.

          @     The at symbol (@) causes lmk to echo actions rather than
                command lines and resulting actions to the output device.

          ~     The tilde symbol (~) is used as an escape symbol for any
                special character used on a command line.

          &     The ampersand symbol (&) is meant for source code
                compatibility with previous implementations of lmk.

     lmk supports macros for representing directory specifications, header
     files and compiler or assembler flags.  Any AmigaDOS command can be
     made into a macro.  A macro is defined by use of the equal symbol (=)
     and takes the following form:

          MACRO=DEFINITION

     The macro is referenced within an lmkfile by the attachment of a
     dollar symbol ($) to the front of the macro name.  The name must be
     enclosed in parenthesis.  For example:

          $(MACRO)

     There are five default macros provided by lmk and these are recognized
     by the position of the dollar sign ($).  The default macros are:

          $@     Set to the target filename


     Lattice Commands                                                   C63








     lmk                   Maintain and update records of file dependencies
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          $?     Set to a dependency list based upon files younger than the
                 target file.

          $*     Set to the prefix and basename of the first dependent
                 filename.

          $<     Set to the dependent filename which caused the actions.

          $>     Set to the basename of the dependent file which caused the
                 actions.

     It is possible to override the definition of a macro from the command
     line of lmk.  The reassignment of the macro is done by the use of the
     equals symbol in the form:

          MACRO1=NEWTEXT

     Note that no spaces are allowed between the name of the macro and the
     equals symbol.  For example:

          LMK DEBUG=YES -f editor

     Transformation or inference rules inform lmk how to make a file with a
     given filename extension from a dependent with a given filename
     extension.  In other words, this means that the rule to convert a .a
     file into a .b file would be termed .a.b.  When used in an lmkfile,
     the transformation rule would be followed by a colon, e.g. .a.b:.

     Three default macros are set whenever a transformation rule is used:

          $*     Is set to the prefix of the first dependency filename
                 including any directory paths.  In other words the
                 filename extension is ignored.

          $<     is set to the dependency filenames which are out of date.

          $>     is set to the basename of the dependency filenames which
                 are not of date.

     Comments may be placed within an lmkfile by use of the hash symbol
     (#).  For example:

          #  This line is a comment

     Rules internal to this implementation of lmk assume you are using the
     Lattice AmigaDOS C Compiler.  These rules are taken from the file
     named lmk.def on the distribution disk.  You are able to override
     these rules if desired, by editing the lmk.def file.

          LC = LC:lc
          LC1 = LC:lc1
          LC1FLAGS = -iINCLUDE: -iINCLUDE:lattice/
          LC2 = LC:lc2

     Lattice Commands                                                   C64








     lmk                   Maintain and update records of file dependencies
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          AS = LC:ASM
          LINK = BLINK:blink

          .DEFAULT:
             $(LC)  $(LC1FLAGS) $*

          .a.o:
             $(AS)  $* -i Include:/Assembler_Includes -o  $*.o

          .c.o:
             $(LC)  $(LC1FLAGS)  $*

          .h.o:
             delete  $*.o
             $(LC)  $(LC1FLAGS)  $*


     lmk provides support for a number of special or fake targets.  In
     other words, an expression which appears to be a target in an lmkfile
     is actually used to control the operation of lmk.  Fake target names
     must always begin with a period (.) and be capitalized:

          * .DEFAULT
          * .IGNORE
          * .ONERROR
          * .SET
          * .SILENT

     The results of each fake targets are tabulated below:

                    Fake Target     Result
                    --------------------------------------
                    .DEFAULT        Specify default rules
                    .IGNORE         Same as -i option
                    .ONERROR        Specify error response
                    .SET            Set logical assignment
                    .SILENT         Same as -s option

     lmk supports the use of local input files.  Local input files provide
     a method of keeping actions associated with making a target in the
     same lmkfile rather than in a separate file on disk.  Any macros
     defined in the lmkfile can be used within a local input file.

     Commands to appear within the temporary file are enclosed between the
     two delimiter characters of < and <.

     A template for construction is:

          command <[preface]<[!] [ (filename) ]
             stmt1
             stmtN
             <


     Lattice Commands                                                   C65








     lmk                   Maintain and update records of file dependencies
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     where:

          command      The action to be handed to AmigaDOS

          preface      The symbol which is to precede the local input
                       filename when it is given to AmigaDOS.

          !            The instruction to lmk to create a local input file
                       containing the statements specified in the rest of
                       the command line.

          filename     The optional filename given to the local input file
                       created.

          stmt1-N      The statements within the local input file.







































     Lattice Commands                                                   C66








     lprof                                               Execution Profiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lprof     Execution Profiler

     SYNOPSIS

          lprof command

     DESCRIPTION

     The lprof command is used to gather information about where a program
     is spending most of its execution time.

     In order to gather statistics on a given command, prefix the command
     with the lprof command.  Note that if the command you wish is not in
     the current directory, you must fully specify the command location
     even if it is in the path.  Also, any redirection operators which were
     immediately after the command must now be moved to after the lprof
     command.

     After the profiler loads the given command, it will execute it and
     gather statistics by examining the current program counter at given
     intervals.  You can verify that the profiling is in progress by the
     power light fluctuating in intensity.  When the program run completes,
     the lprof command will create a file prof.out in the current directory
     that you can then use with the lstat command.

     SEE

     lstat, lc, lc1

     EXAMPLE

     Given a sample program foo that doesn't take any arguments, you can
     gather statistics on it with:

          lprof foo

     For a program that normally takes command line arguments, you can add
     them after the command name as in:

          lprof mycmd -opt 1 -flag

     If the program needed to have output redirected such as in:

          myprog >outfile -opt 2 -doit

     You would instead move the redirection after the lprof command as in:

          lprof >outfile myprog -opt 2 -doit

     If the program were in the C: directory or another directory
     automatically searched by the CLI, you would need to give the full

     Lattice Commands                                                   C67








     lprof                                               Execution Profiler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     path name as in:

          lprof C:mynewcmd -opt 2



















































     Lattice Commands                                                   C68








     lse                                                    Edit user files
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lse    Edit user files

     SYNOPSIS

          lse [-v | [[-ddatafile] file1[.ext] [file2[.ext]]]

     DESCRIPTION

     The lse (Lattice Screen Editor) is a full-screen integrated editor for
     the Amiga.  The lse command line options are as follows:

     -v              This option diplays the LSE version number and
                     copyright.  You will need the version number from this
                     display should you call for support.

     -ddatafile      The option -d indicates that a datafile name is being
                     entered.  The datafile is the name of the file created
                     by the installation program LSEINST.EXE.  The default
                     is to search the directories in the PATH variable for
                     LSE.DAT.  There must be no blank characters between
                     the option -d and the datafile name.

     file1[.ext]     The file to be read into window 1.  The extension is
                     optional.  Using LSEINST you can choose to
                     automatically append default extensions to the file
                     name (like .c for C source files).

     file2[.ext]     The file to be optionally read into window 2.  Again,
                     the extension is optional and appended only if the
                     default (no extension) has been changed.

     You can invoke LSE without a filename by entering:

          lse

     Use the Project Menu and the Rename Option to name a text file invoked
     without a filename.  LSE will not allow you to save an un-named text
     file.














     Lattice Commands                                                   C69








     lstat                                       Profile reader and printer
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lstat     Profile reader and printer

     SYNOPSIS

          lstat >output options program profile

     DESCRIPTION

     This command is used to analyze a profile statistics file created by
     the lprof command.

     The program field is required and indicates the name of the executable
     for which the statistics were gathered.  lstat uses this to obtain all
     the debugging and symbol information for its report.  The profile
     field is optional and is used to override the default of lprof.out
     which is written by the lprof command.  You will wish to use this if
     the file is in a different directory, or you have renamed the file.

     The >output field is optional and redirects lstat's output from the
     screen to an output device or file.  Most programmers use lstat by
     redirecting its output to a file and then printing the file.  See the
     examples below.

     The options field need not be present.  lstat accepts the following
     options:

     -z       This option instructs lstat to display statistics for all
              subroutines even if they were not encountered in profiling.
              The default is to suppress all entries that have a 0 hit
              count.

     -f       This option instructs lstat to display full statistics for
              each subroutine indicating the line numbers within a module
              that were hit by profiling.  By default, only summary
              information about the subroutine is printed.

     -t=n     This option allows pruning of the information presented.  By
              default, lstat will print all subroutines which had even a
              single hit.  If you specify n it will only display those
              which have at least n or more hits.

     Note that this command assumes that you have compiled with at least
     -d1 debugging from lc1 in order to be able to associate the code with
     the given line.  In the absence of this information, the lstat command
     will only report statistics on a subroutine by subroutine basis.

     SEE

     lprof, lc, lc1

     EXAMPLE

     Lattice Commands                                                   C70








     lstat                                       Profile reader and printer
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     These examples assume that the file lprof.out is in the current
     directory.  It is created by running the command:

          lprof testprog

     To simply view the basic statistics about the run, we can give the
     command:

     1> lstat testprog
     header size 0x1c, ProfileHeader 0x1c
     719 run + 158 ready + 77 wait = 954
      75.367% run,  16.562% ready,   8.071% wait
       8.067% samples (58) out of profile range

     counted = 660, RUN - NonTable 661

     Routine %   Total % Offset     Hits   Label
      59.5455%  59.5455%  1c44c      393  getrsc
       8.9394%  68.4848%  1c6fa       59  frersc
       3.6364%  72.1212%  10d38       24  alcmem [lines 64-102 in memory.c]
                                           Most hits -  1.2121% (8) on line
                                                                        80
       2.2727%  74.3939%  18252       15  instal [lines 117-146 in sym.c]
                                           Most hits -  1.2121% (8) on line
                                                                        132

                  ...
       0.1515% 100.0000%  1ca18        1  CXM22

     We can get an indication of the additional routines that did not get
     encountered by the profiler with the -z option.  Note the extra
     routines at the end which have 0 hits and account for 0.0000% of the
     execution time that now appear in the output.

     1> lstat -z testprog
     header size 0x1c, Profile Header 0x1c
     719 run + 158 ready + 77 wait = 954
      75.367% run,  16.562% ready,   8.071% wait
       8.067% samples (58) out of profile range

     counted = 660, RUN - NonTable 661

     Routine %   Total % Offset     Hits   Label
      59.5455%  59.5455%  1c44c      393  getrsc
       8.9394%  68.4848%  1c6fa       59  frersc
       3.6364%  72.1212%  10d38       24  alcmem [lines 64-102 in memory.c]
                                           Most hits -  1.2121% (8) on line
                                                                         80
       2.2727%  74.3939%  18252       15  instal [lines 117-146 in sym.c]
                                           Most hits -  1.2121% (8) on line
                                                                        132
                  ...
       0.0000% 100.0000%  1ca60        0  strcat

     Lattice Commands                                                   C71








     lstat                                       Profile reader and printer
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

       0.0000% 100.0000%  1ca78        0  strncpy

     More information about the individual lines in a subroutine may be
     obtained with the -f option.  For each routine that has line number
     information, it will indicate the percentage of total execution that
     was spent on that line in the subroutine.  Note that subroutines
     without line number information will not show any additional
     information.

     1> lstat -f testprog
     header size 0x1c, Profile Header 0x1c
     719 run + 158 ready + 77 wait = 954
      75.367% run,  16.562% ready,   8.071% wait
       8.067% samples (58) out of profile range

     counted = 660, RUN - NonTable 661

     Routine %   Total % Offset     Hits   Label
      59.5455%  59.5455%  1c44c      393  getrsc
       8.9394%  68.4848%  1c6fa       59  frersc
       3.6364%  72.1212%  10d38       24  alcmem [lines 64-102 in memory.c]
                                             0.3030% (2) on line 64
                                             1.0606% (7) on line 68
                                             0.7576% (5) on line 69
                                             1.2121% (8) on line 80
                                             0.3030% (2) on line 90
       2.2727%  74.3939%  18252       15  instal [lines 117-146 in sym.c]
                                             0.1515% (1) on line 117
                                             0.1515% (1) on line 129
                                             0.4545% (3) on line 131
                                             1.2121% (8) on line 132
                                             0.1515% (1) on line 133
                  ...                        0.1515% (1) on line 138
       0.1515% 100.0000%  1ca18        1  CXM22

     With a large program, the amount of information presented by the
     profiler can be overwhelming.  In attempting to improve performance of
     such a program, it is beneficial to limit the amount of information
     that the lstat program presents.  The -t option can be used to set a
     threshold below which no information will be reported.  With this
     option, the final total will not be 100%

     1> lstat -f -t=2 testprog
     header size 0x1c, ProfileHeader 0x1c
     719 run + 158 ready + 77 wait = 954
      75.367% run,  16.562% ready,   8.071% wait
       8.067% samples (58) out of profile range

     counted = 660, RUN - NonTable 661

     Routine %   Total % Offset     Hits   Label
      59.5455%  59.5455%  1c44c      393  getrsc
       8.9394%  68.4848%  1c6fa       59  frersc

     Lattice Commands                                                   C72








     lstat                                       Profile reader and printer
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

       3.6364%  72.1212%  10d38       24  alcmem [Lines 64-102 in memory.c]
                                             0.3030% (2) on line 64
                                             1.0606% (7) on line 68
                                             0.7576% (5) on line 69
                                             1.2121% (8) on line 80
                                             0.3030% (2) on line 90
       2.2727%  74.3939%  18252       15  instal [lines 117-146 in sym.c]
                                             0.1515% (1) on line 117
                                             0.1515% (1) on line 129
                                             0.4545% (3) on line 131
                                             1.2121% (8) on line 132
                                             0.1515% (1) on line 133
                                             0.1515% (1) on line 138
                  ...
       0.3030%  98.3333%  1ca00        2  xcovf







































     Lattice Commands                                                   C73








     omd                                         Object Module Disassembler
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          omd     Object Module Disassembler

     SYNOPSIS

          omd >output options object source

     DESCRIPTION

     This utility program disassembles an object file produced by the
     Lattice C Compiler and produces an output listing consisting of
     assembly-language statements, possibly interspersed with the original
     C source code.

     The object field is required and gives the complete object file name.
     That is, OMD will not automatically supply the .o extension.  The
     source field is optional.  If present, it must be the complete source
     file name.  When this field is used, you should have compiled the
     source file with the -d option (see the lc command) to produce the
     debugging information in the object module that allows omd to
     associate a particular source line with the object code that was
     generated.  If you did not use the -d option, then the C source lines
     will not appear in omd's output.

     The >output field is optional and redirects omd's output from the
     screen to an output device or file.  Most programmers use omd by
     redirecting its output to a file and then printing the file.  See the
     example below.

     The options field need not be present.  The Amiga implementation of
     omd only accepts the following option:

          -x     This option overrides the default size of the buffer used
                 to hold the external symbol section of the object module.
                 For example, -x200 establishes a buffer that can hold 200
                 external symbols, which is the default.  You should
                 increase this value if omd reports that there are too many
                 external symbols.

     EXAMPLE

     This example compiles MYPROG.C to produce MYPROG.O, which is then
     disassembled.  The disassembled listing is saved in the file
     MYPROG.LST.

          lc -d  myprog
          omd >myprog.lst myprog.o myprog.c






     Lattice Commands                                                   C74








     oml                                            Object Module Librarian
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          oml     Object Module Librarian

     SYNOPSIS

          oml [<cmdfile>] [>listfile] [options] libfile [commands]

     DESCRIPTION

     The object module librarian oml can create a library file by combining
     object modules, generate a listing of the modules (and their public
     symbols) contained in a library, or manipulate modules within an
     existing library file.

     Library files provide a convenient way of collecting object modules to
     be presented as a group of available components during program
     linking; the load module builder then includes only those modules from
     the library which are actually needed by the load module being built.
     Libraries are especially useful when several programs make use of
     common subroutines, since these subroutines can be placed in a library
     file and included on an as required basis when the programs are
     linked.

     A library file is made up of object modules, each of which was
     originally a single file.  Each module within the library is
     identified by a module name, which is normally obtained from the
     object module itself (the Amiga object module format defines a special
     program unit or module name record).  This name is placed in the
     object module by the translator (assembler or compiler) program which
     generates it.  Some modules may not contain a module name at all; in
     that case, the object module librarian assigns a module name of the
     form $nnn, where nnn is a decimal number indicating that the module
     was the nth unnamed module encountered in the library.

     In order to perform replacement of modules within a library file, it
     is necessary to insure that the module contains a program unit or
     module name.  The Lattice AmigaDOS C Compiler and AmigaDOS assembler
     always place a module name in the object files they produce.  The
     current versions of the compiler and assembler use the name of the
     object file.  Thus, compiling ftoc.c produces an object module with
     the name ftoc.o.

     The Metacomco Amiga assembler does not place any module name in the
     output file unless the IDNT directive is used.  For example:

          IDNT     "asmod.o"

     causes the module name asmod.o to be placed in the object file created
     when the source file is assembled.

     When the linker examines a library file to find modules to be
     incorporated into a program, the module name is not important;

     Lattice Commands                                                   C75








     oml                                            Object Module Librarian
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     instead, the linker decides if a module is needed on the basis of the
     public symbols it defines.  A module may define one or more such
     symbols, which identify program components such as functions or data
     elements.  Because the presence of more than one definition for a
     symbol may cause confusion, the object module librarian warns when it
     examines or constructs a library file which includes multiple
     definitions of a symbol.

     Each invocation of oml specifies a particular library file upon which
     operations are to be performed.  Then, a sequence of one or more
     commands is used to indicate the desired operations.

     Commands may be specified on the command line used to execute oml, or
     they may be read from stdin, or a combination of both kinds of input
     may be used.  If no commands are specified on the command line which
     executed oml, they are automatically read from stdin, which is usually
     the user's console but can be redirected to a file.  The special
     command @ (valid only on the command line) is used to switch command
     input from the command line to stdin; an explicit file name may be
     attached to the @ to force commands to be read from that file.
     Commands are read from a file or from stdin until an end of file
     condition is detected; if commands are being read from the user's
     console, a control-backslash must be used to end command input.

     Each command is specified as a single character, usually followed by a
     list of module names or object file names.  Commands and file/module
     names are separated from each other by white space.  If a command is
     followed by one or more names, the first name specified is NOT checked
     as a possible command; thus, names which might be confused with
     commands must be specified as the FIRST name following a command.

     The format of the command to invoke the object module librarian is:

          oml [<cmdfile>] [>listfile] [options] libfile [commands]

     The various command line specifiers are shown in the order they must
     appear in the command.  Optional specifiers are shown enclosed in
     brackets.

     <cmdfile.  Causes commands to be read from the named file, provided
     that (1) no commands are specified on the command line or (2) the @
     command (see below) is used to force commands to be read from stdin.
     If this option is omitted and neither of the above conditions is met,
     commands are read from the user's console.

     >listfile.  Causes the listing output generated by oml to be written
     to the named file.  If omitted, listing output is directed to the
     console.

     options.  Librarian options are specified as a hyphen followed by a
     string of characters which may not include white space.  Current
     options include the following:


     Lattice Commands                                                   C76








     oml                                            Object Module Librarian
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     -oprefix     Specifies that the output filenames for the x command are
                  to be formed by prepending the module name with prefix.
                  Note that if a directory name is to be specified as a
                  prefix, a trailing node separator (a slash under
                  AmigaDOS) must be supplied on the prefix.

     -s           Causes a listing of the public symbols defined in the
                  module to be included in the listing produced by the l
                  command.

     -x           Provides a cross reference for variables and functions
                  used in a library.

     libfile.  Specifies the name of the library file to be created or
     manipulated; this is the only command line field which must be
     present.

     commands.  These specify the actions to be performed by oml with
     respect to the specified library file.  Commands are specified by a
     single character; if alphabetic, either upper or lower case may be
     used.  They are separated from each other and from elements of file or
     module name lists by any white space.  Current commands include:

     r file-list       Replaces the named object files in the library, or
                       adds them to the library if not already present.
                       Note that replacement of existing modules in a
                       library will work correctly only if the file name is
                       the same as the module name.  If the module does not
                       exist in the library, this is unnecessary.

     d module-list     Deletes the named modules from the library.  Since
                       modules without program unit names are assigned
                       module names by the librarian, it may be necessary
                       to obtain a listing (via the l command) in order to
                       determine the assigned $nnn name for the module
                       which is to be deleted.

     x module-list     Extracts the named modules from the library,
                       creating files of the same names.  Note that if the
                       module name includes a path name, the librarian will
                       attempt to create a file with that name.  All files
                       are created in the current directory, unless the -o
                       option is used; in that case, each module name is
                       prefixed with the text specified on the -o option.
                       The special character '*' may be used to indicate
                       that all of the modules in the library are to be
                       extracted.  oml will terminate execution if an
                       attempt to extract a module is unsuccessful.  Note
                       that it is an error to specify the same name in both
                       a replacement and an extraction list.

     l                 Causes generation of a listing of the modules in the
                       library after all other requested operations have

     Lattice Commands                                                   C77








     oml                                            Object Module Librarian
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                       been performed.  If the -s option is used on the
                       command line which invokes oml, the listing will
                       include the public symbols defined in each module as
                       well as a list of the module names themselves.

     @[filename]       Causes the reminder of command input to be read from
                       stdin, or from the named file.  (Note:  brackets are
                       used to show that the file name is optional, and are
                       not included if a file name is specified).

     If replacement modules or deletions are specified, a new version of
     the library file will be built, provided that no errors are detected.
     This new version is created first as a temporary file; when it has
     been completely built, the original library file (if it existed) is
     deleted, and the temporary file renamed.  This sequence insures that
     the original library file will not be affected if an error is
     detected.  Modules are always included in a library in topologically
     sorted order, so that no backward references occur (except in the case
     of modules which reference each other, which are retained in the same
     order in which they are encountered).

     Warning messages are produced if:

          * A module named in a deletion or extraction list was not found
            in the library.
          * If a second definition for a public symbol is encountered in
            one of the modules to be included.

     SEE

     blink, lc

     EXAMPLE

     The following examples illustrate the use of oml.  Remember that
     replacing modules within a library file only works correctly if the
     module name is the same as the file name.  Since a single object file
     is essentially a library of one module, oml can be used to find out
     what module name is included in the object file by using the following
     command:

          oml name.o l

     Building a New Library     Create a list of the file names of the
                                object modules which will make up the
                                library.  The Lattice extract utility can
                                be used to accomplish this.  Then create
                                the library using the following command:

                                     oml new.lib r @name.lst

                                where new.lib is the name of the library to
                                be created, and name.lst contains a list of

     Lattice Commands                                                   C78








     oml                                            Object Module Librarian
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

                                the files to be included in the library.
                                Note that creation of a new library is one
                                occasion where the correspondence between
                                file and module names is not required.

     Extracting Modules         Use the following command to break out all
     from a Library             of the modules from a library:

                                     oml -o:object/ cfuncs.lib x *

                                Note that this command will be successful
                                if no module names in the library
                                CFUNCS.LIB contain path names.  A file for
                                each of the modules in the library will be
                                created in the directory :object/ in this
                                example.

     Deleting Modules from      Use the following command to delete modules
     a Library                  from a library:

                                     oml cfuncs.lib d tribe.o

                                This example deletes the module tribe.o
                                from the library cfuncs.lib.

     Listing the Modules in     Use the following command to obtain a
     a Library                  listing of the modules and symbols in a
                                library file:

                                     oml -s test.lib l

                                The listing may be saved to a file using
                                I/O redirection:

                                     oml >test.lst -s test.lib l



















     Lattice Commands                                                   C79








     splat              Stream editor for performing character substitution
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          splat     Stream editor for performing character substitution

     SYNOPSIS

          splat [-s] [-o | dPREFIX] [-v] pattern string file1 fileN

     DESCRIPTION

     splat is a stream editor for substituting character patterns on
     individual or groups of files.  The original version of the file is
     left unchanged unless specified.  This feature in conjunction with the
     stream operation of splat means a very efficient way of handling
     character substitution.

     The flags shown on the command line above are:

          -dPREFIX     This option will specify a directory prefix
                       indicating the directory where the edited file(s)
                       are to be placed.

          -o           This option will overwrite the original version of
                       the file with the new version.

          pattern      This option will match a pattern as described in the
                       section dealing with GREP.

          -s           This option will echo to the standard output device
                       the name of the current file.  In addition, no
                       character substitutions have been performed on the
                       file, this information is echoed to the output
                       device.  Without this option, splat performs its
                       task silently.

          string       This option will designate the string to be
                       substituted for the pattern.

          -v           This option will display all lines in which
                       substitutions are made to standard output.  No files
                       are created when using this option.













     Lattice Commands                                                   C80








     tb                                                   Traceback Utility
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          tb     Traceback Utility

     SYNOPSIS

          tb [-<options>] [[tbfile] file]

     DESCRIPTION

     This command is used to process a Snapshot.TB file produced by a
     program linked with catch.o.  This file is a standard IFF format file
     that contains information about the program abend and environment at
     the time of the exception.

     If given, options must be a minus sign followed by one or more of the
     following characters in any order.

     l     This will dump all sections present in the traceback file.

     x     Symbol Xref.  This dumps the location of all symbols encountered
           in the program.

     s     Stack.  This dumps the contents of the entire stack at the time
           of the snapshot.

     r     Registers.  This displays the current contents of registers at
           the time of the snapshot.

     v     Environment.  This is the default to display where the program
           was executing and the call back chain.

     m     Memory.  If present in the snapshot file, this will display the
           amount of memory available at the time of the snapshot.

     u     User data.  If present in the snapshot file, this will display
           any program generated user data section.

     If no options are given, tb will default to printing out the current
     stack frame call back to indicate the current code location.

     The optional parameter file indicates a program to read the debugging
     information from.  If not given, the tb command will use the program
     specified in the snapshot file.  Note that this option is most useful
     when you create two images:  one with full debugging information and
     another without debugging information that you normally use.  In this
     way, you get the benefits of faster loading of the nondebug version
     yet still have access to the traceback information if it does crash.

     The tbfile parameter is used to override the default of Snapshot.TB in
     the current directory.  If you give this option, you MUST also specify
     a program name.


     Lattice Commands                                                   C81








     tb                                                   Traceback Utility
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     SEE

     lc, lc1

     EXAMPLE

     With a program test linked with catch.o that has created a file
     Snapshot.TB in the current directory.  We run the tb command to
     produce a traceback:

          tb
          Program Name: testit; run from CLI
          Program load map (addresses are APTRs, sizes are in bytes)
          220f78 $1110  211268 $5b4
          Terminated with GURU number 00000005, Divide by Zero Error
          Error occurred at address 221cde =  foo line 5
             called from 22156a = main line 11
             called from 221c60 =  main + 704
             called from 2210ca = hunk 0 + $152

     To obtain a full dump of all information, we can use the -l option:

          tb
          TraceDump 0.88 Copyright (c) 1988 The Software Distillery

          TraceDump Utility: catch.o; Version 1, Revision 0
          Processor type: 68000
          VBlankFreq 60, PowerSupFreq 60

          Symbols for hunk 0
                           foo = 22153c                 main = 22155c

          Program Name: testit; run from CLI
          Program load map (addresses are APTRs, sizes are in bytes)
          220f78 $1110  211268 $5b4
          Terminated with GURU number 00000005, Divide by Zero Error
          Error occurred at address 221cde = _foo line 5
             called from 22156a = main line 11
             called from 221c60 = _main + 704
             called from 2210ca = hunk 0 + $152

          Registers:
          D0=00221cde D1=00000000 D2=00000001 D3=00002718
          D4=00000001 D5=0000002b D6=0000003b D7=00000000
          A0=00221f54 A1=00243fcc A2=0024460a A3=00225c68
          A4=00211268 A5=002445be A6=002033c8 A7=002445ee
          PC 221cde   C=0 V=0 Z=1 N=0 X=0

          stack top: 244640, stack pointer: 2445ee, stack length: $94
          entire stack, size = $94 bytes
          2445AE: 000003ED 00221558 0000002B 00000000 : ...m.".X...+....
          2445BE: 002445CA 0022156A 00225C68 002445F6 : .$EJ.".j."\h.$E.
          2445CE: 00221C60 00000001 00211620 00225CC4 : .".`.....!. ."\D

     Lattice Commands                                                   C82








     tb                                                   Traceback Utility
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

          2445DE: 00226030 00225C68 83D10000 00000021 : ."`0."\h.Q.....!
          2445EE: 13230021 00211620 00244640 002210CA : .#.!.!. .$F@.".J
          2445FE: 00244602 74657374 6974000A 00000022 : .$F.testit....."
          24450E: 60300000 27100000 27180000 00010000 : `0..'...'.......
          24451E: 002B0000 003B0022 60300022 61300020 : .+...;."`0."a0.
          24452E: 35300022 0F740024 464400FF 425800FF : 50.".t.$FD..BX..
          24453E: 424C0022                            : BL."

     The tb utility can present each individual piece of the information
     based on additional option letters.  In the above dump, you can find
     the following sections:

     (1)     Xref section -x option

     (2)     Environment section -e option

     (3)     Register section -r option

     (4)     Stack section -s option



































     Lattice Commands                                                   C83








     touch      Adjust the time stamp on specified files to the system time
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          touch     Adjust the time stamp on specified file to the system
                    time

     SYNOPSIS

          touch [-m] file1 fileN

     DESCRIPTION

     touch amends the time stamp on a file to the existing system time.
     This utility supports the use of wildcards - the -m option specifies
     MS-DOS convention.  The default for wildcards is the AmigaDOS
     conventions of #? characters.

          ------------------------------------------------------------
          |                                                          |
          |  Note that it is essential that the system date and      |
          |  time are accurate before attempting to use this         |
          |  utility.  Failing to adhere to this caveat may cause    |
          |  unpredictable results.                                  |
          |                                                          |
          ------------------------------------------------------------






























     Lattice Commands                                                   C84








     wc         Tabulate the number of characters, words, lines within file
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          wc     Tabulate the number of characters, words, lines within
                 file

     SYNOPSIS

          wc [-p] [-s] file

     DESCRIPTION

     wc is a utility which is used to obtain statistical information about
     the contents of a file.  The details of the file are directed to the
     standard output device - the screen.

     The flags shown on the command line above are:

          p           This option will filter the file to remove
                      nonprintable characters.

          -s file     This option will calculate a checksum for the
                      specified file.

     The checksum calculation format consists of two parts - the number of
     printable ASCII characters and the checksum for the file.  An example
     of the calculation format looks like this:

          Characters  : 12391
            Words     : 1975
            Lines     : 130

          Sum : 1919 0






















     Lattice Commands                                                   C85


















                                   Section 3

                      Lattice Amiga Environment Variables



     This section describes the AmigaDOS environment variables that are
     used by the Lattice C Compiler and related programs.







































     Lattice Commands                                                   C86








     include:                                           Include search path
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          Include:     Include search path

     SYNOPSIS

          assign INCLUDE: include path

     DESCRIPTION

     This logical name is used by the compiler to find files that are
     included via the #include statement.  The include path should be the
     disk and directory specification that describe the location of the
     header files.  For example,

          assign INCLUDE: "Lattice C:include"

     indicates that the compiler should look for included files in the
     directory include on the disk whose volume name is Lattice C.  Note
     that if any portion of the path contains spaces, then the entire path
     must be enclosed in double quotes.

     The compiler accepts two forms of the #include statement, as follows:

          #include <file>

          #include "file"

     When the first form is used, the compiler looks for file only in the
     directory associated with the INCLUDE: logical name.  With the second
     form, the compiler looks in the current directory, then in any
     directories specified via the -i option, and finally in the directory
     associated with the INCLUDE: logical name.

     SEE

     assign, lc, lc1

















     Lattice Commands                                                   C87








     lc:                                      Compiler executable file path
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lc:     Compiler executable file path

     SYNOPSIS

          assign LC: program path

     DESCRIPTION

     This is the logical name used by the driver program lc to locate the
     various programs required to compile and link source modules.  This
     can be very useful on floppy disk based systems where there may not be
     sufficient online storage capacity to contain the compiler files in
     addition to other working files.  By assigning LC: to the disk volume
     and directory containing the compiler and linker, lc will be able to
     locate and load the appropriate programs even if that disk volume
     isn't currently mounted.  If required, you will be prompted to insert
     the necessary disk volume at the correct time.

     For example,

          assign LC: "Lattice C:"

     will cause lc to load the compiler executable programs from the root
     level of the disk volume named Lattice C.

     If the assignment is not made, lc looks for the programs in the
     default directory lc/ in the root level of the system drive.

     SEE

     assign, lc





















     Lattice Commands                                                   C88








     lib:                                                 Library file path
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          lib:     Library file path

     SYNOPSIS

          assign LIB: library path

     DESCRIPTION

     This is the logical name used by lc to locate the Lattice C startup
     routine c.o and the Lattice and Amiga libraries for the linker.  If
     the assignment has been made, the driver program, lc, will specify
     that the linker look in the directory associated with the logical name
     for the startup code and the standard libraries.  The directory may be
     on any disk volume.  If the volume is not mounted, you will be
     prompted to insert the correct volume at the appropriate time.  For
     example,

          assign LIB: "Lattice C:lib"

     specifies directory lib/ on disk volume Lattice C as the location of
     the libraries and startup code.

     If the assignment is not made, the linker will be directed to look in
     the subdirectory lib/ of the path used to locate the linker.  In other
     words, if the logical name LC: is assigned, the libraries will be
     assumed to be in the directory LC:lib.  If LC: is not assigned, the
     directory SYS:lc/lib will be used.

     SEE

     assign, lc, lc1





















     Lattice Commands                                                   C89








     quad:                                           Intermediate file path
                                                            Class:  LATTICE

     NAME

          quad     Intermediate file path

     SYNOPSIS

          assign QUAD: quadfile path

     DESCRIPTION

     This is the logical name used to direct the compiler to place the
     intermediate file in some location other than the source file
     directory.  By default, the compiler creates the intermediate, or
     quad, file in the same directory as the source file.  You can use the
     -q option of the lc driver program or the -o option of lc1 to cause
     this file to be created somewhere else.

     The QUAD: logical name is used by the driver program to assign a
     different default location for the intermediate file.  For example,

          assign QUAD: ram:

     will cause the compiler to use ram disk for the intermediate file when
     it is invoked via the lc command.

     SEE

     assign, lc, lc1


























     Lattice Commands                                                   C90



 














                                  Appendix A

                           Compiler Command Summary












































     Lattice Commands                                                   C91








     The following table summarizes all of the options for the Lattice
     Amiga C Compiler lc, lc1, and lc2 commands.

       LC   |  LC1   |  LC2  | Meaning
     -------|--------|-------|---------------------------------------------
       -ab  |        |  -cb  | Chip BSS
       -ac  |        |  -cc  | Chip Code
       -ad  |        |  -cd  | Chip Data
       -b   |   -b   |       | Base relative data
       -b0  |   -b0  |       | Non-Base relative data
       -b1  |   -b1  |       | Base Relative Data
       -c+  |   -c+  |       | Suppress structure messages
       -ca  |   -ca  |       | ANSI compatibility
       -cc  |   -cc  |       | Allow nested comments
       -cd  |   -cd  |       | Allow $ in identifiers
       -ce  |   -ce  |       | Suppress error line printing
       -cf  |   -cf  |       | Require function prototypes
       -ci  |   -ci  |       | Suppress multiple includes of same file
       -ck  |   -ck  |       | Allow new keywords
       -cm  |   -cm  |       | Allow multiple character constants
       -co  |   -co  |       | Enable old style preprocessor
       -cr  |   -cr  |       | Allow register parameter parsing
       -cs  |   -cs  |       | Create only one copy of identical strings
       -ct  |   -ct  |       | Enable warnings for tags used without
            |        |       |      definition
       -cu  |   -cu  |       | Force all char declarations as unsigned char
       -cw  |   -cw  |       | Shut off warning for return without a return
       -cx  |   -cx  |       | Treat all global declarations as externals
       -C   |        |       | Continue on error
       -d   |   -d   |       | Enable debugging
       -d0  |   -d0  |       | Disable debugging
       -d1  |   -d1  |       | Enable debugging-dump line table
       -d2  |   -d2  |       | Generate symbol information
       -d3  |   -d3  |       | Generate symbol info, dump at every line
       -d4  |   -d4  |       | Generate full symbol information
       -d5  |   -d5  |       | Generate full symbol info, dump at line
      -dx=y |  -dx=y |       | Define preprocessor symbol
       -f   |   -f   |       | Use Motorola FFP
       -ff  |   -ff  |       | Use Motorola FFP
       -f8  |   -f8  |       | Generate code for Motorola 68881
       -fi  |   -fi  |       | Generate code for IEEE libraries
       -fl  |   -fl  |       | Use standard Lattice libraries
       -gd  |   -gd  |       | Cross reference defined symbols
       -gc  |   -gc  |       | Cross reference compiler provided files
       -ge  |   -ge  |       | List excluded lines
       -gh  |   -gh  |       | List header files
       -gi  |   -gi  |       | List included files
       -gm  |   -gm  |       | List macro expansions
       -gn  |   -gn  |       | Print narrow lines
       -gs  |   -gs  |       | List source
       -gx  |   -gx  |       | Produce cross reference listing
      -Hxxx |  -hxxx |       | Read in header file xxx
       -hb  |        |  -hb  | Fast BSS
       -hc  |        |  -hc  | Fast Code
       -hd  |        |  -hd  | Fast Data
       -ix  |   -ix  |       | Specify include directory

     Lattice Commands                                                   C92








       LC   |  LC1   |  LC2  | Meaning
     -------|--------|-------|---------------------------------------------
      -j<n> |  -j<n> |       | Disable message #n
     -j(n>e | -j<n>e |       | Make message #n an error instead of a
            |        |       |      warning
     -j<n>i | -j<n>i |       | Disable message #n
     -j<n>w | -j<n>w |       | Enable message #n as a warning
       -L+  |        |       | Specify additional linker objects
       -La  |        |       | Addsym
       -Lc  |        |       | Small code memory model
       -Ld  |        |       | Small data memory model
       -Lf  |        |       | FFP math library
       -Lh  |        |       | Hunk map option
       -Ll  |        |       | Library map option
       -Lm  |        |       | Math library
       -Ln  |        |       | Nodebug option
       -Lo  |        |       | Overlay map option
       -Ls  |        |       | Symbol map option
       -Lt  |        |       | Tiny modules
       -Lv  |        |       | Verbose option
       -Lx  |        |       | X-ref map option
       -l   |   -l   |       | Align objects on longword boundaries
       -M   |        |       | Only compile modified source files
       -m   |        |  -m   | Generate code for Motorola 68000
       -m0  |        |  -m0  | Generate code for Motorola 68000
       -m1  |        |  -m1  | Generate code for Motorola 68010
       -m2  |        |  -m2  | Generate code for Motorola 68020
       -m3  |        |  -m3  | Generate code for Motorola 68030
       -ma  |        |  -ma  | Generate code for All Motorola processors
       -mc  |        |  -mc  | Disable cleanup overhead reduction
            |        |       |      enhancement
       -mr  |        |  -mr  | Disable automatic registerization
       -ms  |        |  -ms  | Generate code optimized for space
       -mt  |        |  -mt  | Generate code optimized for time
       -n   |   -n   |       | Retain only 8 characters for identifiers
       -O   |        |       | Invoke Global Optimizer
       -ox  |        |  -ox  | Place object file in location x
       -p   |        |  -p   | Generate stack probe instructions
       -p   |   -p   |       | Preprocess only
       -pe  |   -pe  |       | Generate prototypes only for externs
       -ph  |   -ph  |       | Generate precompiled header file
       -pp  |   -pp  |       | Generate prototypes with _PARMS for
            |        |       |      portability
       -pr  |   -pr  |       | Generate prototype file
       -ps  |   -ps  |       | Generate prototypes only for static
            |        |       |      functions
       -qx  |   -ox  |       | Place quad file in location x
     -q<n>e | -q<n>e |       | Quit compilation after n error/warnings
     -q<n>w | -q<n>w |       | Quit compilation after n warnings
       -q   |        |       | Same as -q1e1w
       -r   |   -r   |       | Default all subroutine calls to NEAR
            |        |       |      (PC-relative)
       -r0  |   -r0  |       | Default all subroutine calls to FAR
            |        |       |      (Absolute)
       -r1  |   -r1  |       | Default all subroutine calls to NEAR
            |        |       |      (PC-relative)

     Lattice Commands                                                   C93








       LC   |  LC1   |  LC2  | Meaning
     -------|--------|-------|---------------------------------------------
       -rr  |   -rr  |       | Default all subroutine calls/entries to
            |        |       |      Register conventions
       -rs  |   -rs  |       | Default all subroutine calls/entries to
            |        |       |      Standard/Stack conventions
       -rb  |   -rb  |       | Generate code for both Register and stack
            |        |       |      convention entries
       -Rx  |        |       | Place compiled objects into library x
       -s   |        |  -s   | Specify default segment names
      -sb=x |        | -sb=x | Specify name for BSS segment
      -sc=x |        | -sc=x | Specify name for code segment
      -sd=x |        | -sd=x | Specify name for data segment












































     Lattice Commands                                                   C94








                                     INDEX

     A

     ADDSYM  C25
     Adjust the time stamp on specified files to the system time  C84
     AmigaDOS environment variables  C86
     AmigaDOS LIST Command  C39
     asm  C3
     Automatic Link Vector  C16

     B

     Big compiler pass 1  C56
     blink  C7
     build  C24

     C

     CLI window  C26
     CodePRobe source-level debugger  C25
     command-line options  C25
     Compiler code generator  C58
     Compiler executable file path  C88
     Compiler pass 1  C56
     cpr  C25
     cxref  C28

     D

     Determines the differences between two files  C30
     diff  C30

     E

     Edit user files  C69
     environment variables  C86
     Execution Profiler  C67
     extract  C32

     F

     fd2pragma  C33
     files  C34

     G

     Generates a cross-reference listing for C language source files  C28
     Global regular expression search and print  C36
     grep  C36

     H

     Header file compressor  C59



     Lattice Commands INDEX                                               i








     I

     Iconic Tools  C21
     Include search path  C87
     include:  C87
     initialization  C27
     Inserts lines of text into a given file  C24
     interlace mode  C26
     Intermediate file path  C90

     L

     Lattice 68000 Macro Assembler  C3
     Lattice C Compiler  C40
     lc1b  C56
     lc1  C56
     lc2  C58
     lc:  C88
     lcompact  C59
     lc  C40
     lib:  C89
     Library file path  C89
     line mode  C26
     Linker for the Lattice AmigaDOS compiler  C7
     linker  C25
     lmk  C61
     lprof  C67
     lse  C69
     lstat  C70

     M

     Maintain and update records of file dependencies  C61
     Map Files  C17
     Multiple Overlay Nodes  C15

     O

     Object Module Disassembler  C74
     Object Module Librarian  C75
     omd  C74
     oml  C75
     Overlay Call Vectors  C16

     P

     Pragma Generator  C33
     Prints the names of files in specified directory  C32
     Profile reader and printer  C70
     profile script  C26
     profile scripts  C27

     Q

     quad:  C90
     quit  C25

     Lattice Commands INDEX                                              ii








     R

     restart  C25, C27

     S

     Search, copy, or erase files of directories  C34
     Special Hunks  C13
     spill file  C27
     splat  C80
     start  C26
     Stream editor for performing character substitution  C80

     T

     Tabulate the number of characters, words, lines within file  C85
     tb  C81
     touch  C84
     Traceback Utility  C81

     W

     wc  C85
     window coordinates  C26
     Workbench  C26
































     Lattice Commands INDEX                                             iii



