Before you do anything else ...

               READ THIS PAGE!
This is your Aztec C documentation. Upon close inspection, you may find
something a little unusual abou t this book. That is because this book is actually
five separate manuals which have been bound together as one book for your
convenience and accessibility.

The five books included here are:
             Book 1: Aztec C User Guide
             Book 2: Az'tec C Reference Manual
             Book 3: Aztec C Library Manual
             Book 4: Aztec C UniTools
             Book 5: Aztec C Source Level Debugger
On the next page is a list of the chapters that are found in these five manuals.
Since these manuals are essentially five separate units, each one comes wi th its
own Table of Contents and its own Index. The chapters also have "thumb tabs"
for easier access. If you tum this book on its side, you will see these thumb tabs,
as well as the solid black lines that separate the five main sections.

Your Aztec C documentation is designed to help you through the C program-
ming process, from installing your disks to performing the most complex of
tasks. To use this documentation most effectively, you should read Chapter
One, the Overview, of The Aztec C User Guide before you proceed.

We hope that you will enjoy using this newly revised documentation. We
welcome any comments or suggestions you may have that will help us as we
prepare future releases. Send any remarks about the documentation to the
attention of the Documentation Department.

Thank you, and enjoy! You have chosen the most powerful C development
system available for the Amiga, and we are confident that Aztec C will surpass
your highest expectations.
                                       .            ......
                                               '"''''''''          ,
                                                                   -
                                                                              .
                                                                            ,--.




 .
                         AUentioh:Updates!
                                 ---       -   ,-            ,--       ,   .. ,    ,.


 If you haveNpdat~to .tliis verskm ofAzfecC f()r theAIniga,lefer to· the
 section "Notesful'reVious Users" in the Overview chapter of the Aztec C
 User Guide. This section. includes important informati(JnfOrprevious users!
Aztec C for the Amiga

Book 1: Aztec C User Guide
   Chapter 1 - Overview
   Chapter 2 - Getting Started
   Chapter 3 - Aztec Shell Tutorial
   Chapter 4 - Technical Support

Book 2: Aztec C Reference Manual
   Chapter 1 - Overview
   Chapter 2 - Compiler
   Chapter 3 - Language Specifications
   Chapter 4 - Assembler
   Chapter 5 - Linker
   Chapter 6 - Utilities
   Chapter 7 - Debugger
   Chapter 8 - Technical Information
   Chapter 9 - Error Messages

Book 3: Aztec C Library Manual
   Chapter 1 - Introduction
   Chapter 2 - Library Overview
   Chapter 3 - Library Functions
   Chapter 4 - Workbench

Book 4: Aztec C UnlToois
   Chapter 1 - Overview
   Chapter 2 - Diff
   Chapter 3 - Grep
   Chapter 4 - Make
   Chapter 5 - Z Editor

Book 5: Aztec C Source Level Debugger
   Chapter 1 - Overview
   Chapter 2 - Getting Started
   Chapter 3 - Tutorial
   Chapter 4 - Commands
Suggestions for Further Reading
   Manx Software Systems recommends the following books as additions to
   your C development library. The books listed here will serve as helpful
   supplements to your standard Aztec C documentation.
  Most of these books are available directly from Manx Software Systems. To
  order or for more information contact our Sales Department at 1-800-221-
  0440. (International call 201-542-2121.) Or, you may write to us at: Manx
  Software Systems, P.O. Box 55, Shrewsbury, NJ 07702.

      • The C Programming LangUilge by Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis
       M. Ritchie. (Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey
       07632)

      • Programming in C by Stephen G. Kochan. (Hayden Book Com-
       pany, Hasbrouck Heights, New Jersey 07604)

      • C: A Reference ManUilI by Samuel P. Harbison and Guy L. Steele,
        Jr. (Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632)

      • Inside the Amiga by John Thomas Berry. (Howard W. Sams &
       Company, 4300 West 62nd St., Indianapolis, Indiana 46268)

      • Inside the Amiga with C by John Thomas Berry. (Howard W. Sams
       & Company, 4300 West 62nd St., Indianapolis, Indiana 46268)

      • Amiga Programmer's Handbook by Eugene P. Mortiinore. (SYBEX,
       Inc., 2344 Sixth Street, Berkeley, California 94710)

      • Programming the 68000 Macintosh Assembly LangUilge by Edwin
       Rosenzweig and Harland Harrison. (Hayden Book Company,
       Hasbrouck Heights, New Jersey 07604)

      • Motorola's MC68000 16-bit Microprocessor User's ManUilI. (Prentice-
       Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632)

      • Motorola's MC68020 32-bit Microprocessor User's ManUilI. (Prentice-
       Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632)
   • AmigaDOS Technical Reference Manual. (Commodore-Amiga, Inc.
     1200 Wilson Dr, West Chester, Pennsylvania 19380)

   • Amiga Developers Reference Guide by David Lai. (Pacific Press,
     Post Office Box 611075, San Jose, California 95161-1075)

   • The "Kickstart" Guide to the Amiga. (ARIADNE Software, Ltd., 273
     Kensal Road, London WI0 5DB England)

   • Amiga ROM Kernel Manual, Volumes 1 and 2. (Commodore Busi-
     ness Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference Series, Addison-
     Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts)

   • Amiga Hardware Reference Manual. (Commodore Business
     Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference Series, Addison-Wes-
     ley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts)

   • Amiga Intuition Reference Manual. (Commodore Business
     Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference Series, Addison-Wes-
     ley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts)

   • Amiga ROM Kernel Reference Manual: Libraries and Devices. (Com-
     modore Business Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference
     Series, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Mas-
     sachusetts)

   • Amiga ROM Kernel Reference Manual: Exec. (Commodore Business
     Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference Series, Addison-Wes-
     ley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts)

Of course, there are many other useful books on the market available for
Amiga C programmers. This list has been included to help you get started.
      Aztec C User Guide
            for the
             Amiga

                    Version 5.0
                   October 1989




Copyright © 1988,1989 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.
                All Rights Reserved
                    Worldwide

                DISTRIBUTED BY:

              Manx Software Systems
                   P.O. Box 55
              Shrewsbury, NJ 07702
                 (201) 542-2121
USE RESTRICTIONS
  You are pennitted to install and use this product on a single computer.
  Multiple CPU systems require supplementary licenses.
  Before using any Aztec C products, the License Registration included with
  this product must be signed and mailed to:

                            Manx Software Systems
                                 P.O. Box 55
                            Shrewsbury, NJ 07702

COPYRIGHT
  This software package and document are copyrighted ©1988, 1989 by Manx
  Software Systems. All rights reserved worldwide.
  No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, transcribed,
  stored in any retrieval system, or translated into any language without prior
  written pennission of Manx Software Systems.

DISCLAIMER
  Manx Software Systems makes no representations or warranties with
  respect to this product and specifically disclaims any implied warranties of
  merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose. Manx Software Sys-
  tems reserves the right to modify the programs and revise the contents of
  the manual without obligation to notify any person of such revision or
  changes.

TRADEMARKS
  Aztec C, Manx AS, Manx LN, Z, and SDB are trademarks of Manx Software
  Systems. CP IM-86 and CP IM-80 are trademarks of Digital Research.
  MSDOS is a trademark of Microsoft. PCDOS is a trademark of IBM. UNIX
  is a trademark of AT&T Bell Laboratories. Macintosh and Apple II are
  trademarks of Apple Computer. Atari is a trademark of Atari Computers.
  Amiga is a trademark of Commodore-Arniga.
Manual Revision History
       October 1989       Fifth Edition
       December 1988      Fourth Edition
       May 1988           Third Edition
       April 1986         Second Edition
       February 1986      First Edition
                                                                  Table of Contents

Chapter 1 - Overview
  In troduction ........................................... 1 - 1
      AZTEC C CONFIGURATIONS AND DOCUMENTATION ...... 1 - 1
      PORTABILITY, DEPENDABILITY, AND SPEED ............... 1 - 3
  How To Proceed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1 - 4
          About This User Guide ................................... 1 - 5
  Note to Previous Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1 - 6
      Aztec C Reference Manual ................................... 1 - 6
      Aztec C Library Manual ..................................... 1 - 6
      Aztec C UniTools ........................................... 1 - 7
      Aztec C Source Level Debugger .............................. 1 - 7
      Summary .................................................. 1 - 7


Chapter 2 - Getting Started
  System Requirements . .................................. 2 - 1
  Backup the Distribution Disks .......................... 2 - 2
  Read the README File ................................ 2 - 2
  Installation Procedure .................................. 2 - 3
  System Overview ...................................... 2 - 3
      Basic elements of Aztec C .................................... 2 - 4
         Types of Files ........................................... 2 - 4
             executable files ....................................... 2 - 4
             library files .......................................... 2 - 4
             header files include: .................................. 2 - 5
         Library Files for Different Data Definitions ................. 2 - 5
       Environment Variables ................................... 2 - 7
       Resident Libraries ....................................... 2 - 7
          Amiga Workbench .................................... 2 - 7
          User Created Resident Libraries ........................ 2 - 8
       #pragmas .............................................. 2 - 8
       Pre-compiled Headers ................................... 2 - 8
       Debuggers - db sdb sdbf .................................. 2 - 9
       Third Party Software ..................................... 2 - 9
       Freeware, Shareware, and Bulletin Boards .................. 2 - 9
       Multiple Segments and Transient Overlays ................ 2 -10
       Mixed C and Assembly Code ............................ 2 - 10
  QuikFix .............................................. 2 - 10
          QuikFix Compiler Options ........................... 2 - 11
          QuikFix Z Editor Options and Commands .............. 2 - 11
          Batch Processing with QuikFix ........................ 2 - 12
          Make and QuikFix ................................... 2- 13
          Further Information on QuikFix ....................... 2 - 13
  SYSTEM PERFORMANCE AND COMPATIBILITY ...... 2 -13
  MAKING A WORKING COpy OF AZTEC C .........•.. 2 - 14
          Libraries ............................................ 2 - 17
  Using Aztec C with a Hard Disk ........................ 2 -19
  If You Have A Problem ................................ 2 - 21


Chapter 3 - Tutorial
  Development Environments ............................. 3-1
    WORKING THROUGH THE TUTORIAL ..................... 3 - 1
  Using the CLI .......................................... 3 - 2
    STARTING AZTEC C ....................................... 3 - 2
      A. Using floppy disks: ................................... 3 - 2
      B. Using a hard disk: ..................................... 3 - 2


                                   ii
    COMPILING, ASSEMBLING, AND LINKING ................. 3 - 6
    ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES ............................... 3 - 7
    THE RAM DISK ............................................ 3 - 8
  Summaty .................................................... 3 - 9


Chapter 4 - Technical Support
       Have Everything With You ............................... 4 - 1
       Know What Question You Wish To Ask .................... 4 - 2
       Isolate The Code That Caused The Problem ................. 4 - 2
       Use Your C Language Book And Technical Manuals First ..... 4 - 2
       When To Expect An Answer .............................. 4 - 3
       Use Our Mail-in Service .................................. 4 - 3
       Updates, Availability, Prices .............................. 4 - 3
       Bulletin Board System .................................... 4 - 3
       Phone Support .......................................... 4 - 4
    MANX PROBLEM REPORT ................................. 4 - 5
      Description of problem ................................... 4 - 5




                                   iii
                   OVERVIEW




Chapter 1 - Overview

Introduction
  The Aztec C Software Development System is the ideal tool for both
  inexperienced and experienced. C language programmers. Aztec C is
  powerful and flexible, offering the freedom to choose from a variety of
  programs and applications to fit your specific C programming needs.
  Inexperienced users can employ the UNIX standard input/ output routines
  to quickly create C programs that will run on the Amiga, without having
  to use the more complex Amiga Toolbox routines. EXperienced users can
  employ extended interfaces with full access to all of the Amiga Workbench
  and other ROM routines.
  Aztec C is fully compatible with the draft proposed. ANSI standard and
  provides extensive support for 68020, 68881, device drivers, Intuition, and
  other specialized. Amiga software and hardware. Numerous examples are
  provided with your Aztec C package.

AZTEC C CONFIGURATIONS AND DOCUMENTATION
  The Aztec C product line for the Amiga offers two core systems and several
  add-on products,as follows:
             Aztec C User Guide for the Amiga



• Aztec C - Professional System
  The Professional level of Aztec C for the Amiga includes the
  Aztec Shell, Compiler, 68000 Macro Assembler, Overlay Linker,
  Librarian, Run Time Libraries, Pro filer, Full Amiga Workbench
  Interface, Z editor, and a Portable C Library Interface.

 Aztec C offers four different IEEE floating point formats: Manx IEEE
 double precision emulation, Motorola 68881 coprocessor, Motorola
 IEEE Floating Point, and Amiga Fast Floating Point. These formats are
 especially helpful with math programming.

• Aztec C - Developer System
  The Developer level of Aztec C for the Amiga includes the Aztec
  Shell, Compiler, 68000 Macro Assembler, Overlay Linker, Source
  Level Debugger, Librarian, Run Time Libraries, Profiler, Full
  Amiga Workbench Interface, a Portable C Library Interface, and
  the complete set of Manx "Unitools."

 UniTools is a productivity enhancement package which includes the
 utilities make, diff, grep, and z editor.

      make is a program maintenance utility
      diff is a source file comparison utility
      grep is a pattern-matching program
      z is a powerful text editor, similar to the
         UNIX vi editor.

 Documentation for both the Professional System and the Developer
 System includes: the Aztec C User Guide, the Aztec C Reference Manual,
 the Aztec C Library Manual, and Aztec C UmTools for the Amiga. Note
 that if you have purchased the Professional System, you will receive
 the documentation for UniTools, but only receive the Z editor portion
 of the software. make, grep, and diff are not included in the Profes-
 sional System.
                         Overview



  The special Aztec C add-on products include:

     • Source Level Debugger
       SDB is Manx's critically acclaimed Source Level Debugger. It is
       an interactive debugger, designed for fast response and ease in
       debugging. The windows in SDB display C source and com-
       mand output separately, with a third window for entering com-
       mands. With SDB, you can ...

        .. .display all active function names
        .. .display values of passed parameters
        ...examine variables from any active function
        ... use function or line-by-line tracing
        .. .set breakpoints by lines, functions, or variables
        .. .see actual C source as it executes
        ...customize the debugging environment with
              reusable command macros and procedures
        ...and more!

      Documentation for SDB is the Aztec SDB Guide.

     • Aztec Library Source
       Aztec Library Source includes the original assembly and C
       source to all routines found in the Aztec Run Time Libraries.
       Aztec C Library Source does not come with a separate manual;
       all of the information needed to use Library Source is found in
       the Aztec C Library Manual, which is included with the basic
       Aztec C package.

PORTABILITY, DEPENDABILITY, AND SPEED
  Manx makes several types of Aztec C Software Development Systems.
  Manx's native development systems allow development to be done on the
  Amiga; Manx's cross-development systems allow development to be done on
  other machines, with the resulting programs downloaded to the Amiga.
  Manx also has compilers for developing C programs which run on systems
  other than the Amiga. Native development or cross development systems
                    Aztec C User Guide for the .....,,, ..:;.a.



  are available for the Macintosh, Atari, Apple II, MS-DOS, and other popular
  systems.
  When you chose Aztec C for the Amiga, you chose dependability. Since
  1981, Manx has been acquiring and developing an extensive and com-
  prehensive set of test suites that thoroughly exercise our products to
  provide the high degree of reliability and dependability that our users
  expect. Thousands of users have worked with Aztec C for the Amiga since
  1986 and have given us their feedback-good and bad. Manx uses these
  suggestions to continually improve and enhance Aztec C.
  Aztec C is also known for its speed. When you use the Aztec compiler, you
  can specify precompiled header files, thereby speeding up compilation
  time. If you already have a header file of your own, our compiler allows
  you to build precompiled header files and use them with our package.
  The optimizing assembler is another important factor when you are con-
  cerned about the size and speed of your program. It performs branch
  shortening, as well as other code improvements.


How To Proceed
  Now that you have Aztec C, the first thing you are going to do is ...
       ...read the manual?
  If you are like most users, probably not. The Manx manuals are very
  thorough-and a very important part of your Aztec C package-but we
  recognize that you may be anxious to put Aztec C to work as soon as you
  can. To some users, that means "skimming" the important parts and getting
  to the rest later.
  In light of this, we would like to offer a bit of advice. The list below, for both
  new and experienced users, shows how we suggest you proceed. This may
  help you get off to a quicker start.



       o Step 1:    Read the readme file (on disk).

       o Step 2: Install your disks, using the installation instructions in
                    Chapter 2, Getting Started.
                        Overview




        o Step 3:   Familiarize yourself with Aztec C by completing this
                    chapter. Be sure to work through the "hello world" pro-
                    gram which Aztec provides step by step in Chapter 3,
                    Tutorial.

        o Step 4: Look through both your Aztec C Reference Manual and
                    your Aztec C Library Manual. Pay particular attention to
                    the Language Specifications, Compiler, Assembler,
                    and Linker chapters of the Reference Manual. Even if you
                    are an experienced Aztec C user, you should skim
                    through these chapters for the most up-to-date informa-
                    tion on Aztec C.

        o Step 5:   If you have the Developer System, refer to your Aztec C
                    UniTools manual for detailed information on diff, grep,
                    make, and the z editor,and your Aztec C Source Level
                    Debugger Manual for detailed information on sdb.

About This User Guide
   This guide gives you the basic information that you need to start working
   with Aztec C. It consists of this introduction, a guide for getting started, a
   tutorial, and information on our technical support.
   Of course, this manual also includes a detailed Table of Contents and a
   thorough Index.
   Throughout this manual, we use the following conventions:

      input                to indicate data entered by the user (e.g., com-
                           mands, options, and functions)

      output               to show text that is generated by the computer.

      DEFINITION           small uppercase bold is used on terms that may
                           be new to the user;most likely will include ex-
                           planation or definition of term

      (choicell choice2) braces and a vertical bar mean that you have a
                         choice between two or more items
                    Aztec C User Guide for the Amiga



     placeholders        information that must be supplied by the user, for
                         example, filename, range, identifier, etc.

     [ optional]         brackets to show optional information.



Note to Previous Users
  If you have used Aztec C for the Amiga prior to the release of Version 5.0,
  then you should be aware of the many changes and additions that have
  been implemented. The following paragraphs discuss these changes and
  direct you to the appropriate chapters for further information.

Aztec C Reference Manual
  The most important change to Aztec C for the Amiga is that it is now fully
  draft-proposed ANSI standard. Aztec C's implementation of ANSI C is
  discussed fully in Chapter 2 of your Aztec C Reference Manual, Language
  Specifications.
  It is very important that you read Chapter 3, Compiler, particularly with
  regards to all of the compiler options. This chapter discusses many substan-
  tial changes to the compiler.
  The following chapters also include changes from previous releases and
  should be reviewed:

     -Assembler
     - Utilities
     -Debugger
     - Technical Information
     - Error Messages


Aztec C Library Manual
  The library functions included with your Aztec C system have changed
  substantially with the draft-proposed ANSI standard. Both the Library
                       Overview



  Overview chapter and the Library Functions chapter reflect these changes
  and should be reviewed.
  You will notice, also, that the Library Functions chapter has been improved
  and expanded, offering a complete synopsis and description of each func-
  tion. Most functions are listed separately, with frequent references to other
  related functions.

Aztec C UniTools
  With the make utility, you will find one minor change: Default rules, when
  applied to files in other directories, will place the results in those other
  directories. Previously, the results were placed in the current directory.


Aztec C Source Level Debugger
  Refer to Chapter 2, Getting Started, and Chapter 4, Commands, for chan-
  ges and new commands.


Summary
  You should find that the extended type-checking capabilities of ANSI C
  make programming easier. And, since ANSI is the standard for the C
  language, your Aztec C programs will now be more portable than ever
  before.
          GETTING STARTED




Chapter 2 - Getting Started
  This chapter provides the information you need to begin using Aztec C.
  The following are the major topics:

     • System requirements

     • Backing up the distribution disks

     • The readme file

     • Installation Procedure

     • System overview

     • QuikFix Feature

     • System Performance & Compatibility


System Requirements
  To efficiently use Aztec C, make sure your hardware and software meet the
  following specifications:
                   Aztec C User Guide



     • Aztec C is compatible with the Amiga 500, Amiga 1000, Amiga
       2000, and Amiga 2500. Aztec C is also compatible with all
       known accelerator boards. Manx recommends at least one flop-
       py disk drive, preferably two. Aztec C is easily installed on a
       hard disk. Aztec C will run comfortably in 500k of memory.

     • SOB, the Source Level Debugger, only uses 90k, but requires a
       minimum of 256K of available RAM memory. (sdb is included as
       part of the Aztec C68k Amiga Developer System)


Backup the Distribution Disks
  The diskcopy program provided with your Amiga will copy all of the
  distribution disks, or you can use any other utility that copies disks. The
  disks are not copy protected. It is an excellent idea to leave the original
  distribution disks write-protected and to make at least one backup copy. If
  you have a problem with any of the distribution disks, call or FAX Manx
  Customer Support. The Fax number is 201-542-8386 and the Customer
  Support number is 201-389-0290.
  Walt Disney once said, "We don't make movies to make more money. We
  make money to make more movies." There are estimates that for every
  legal copy of commercial software there are three illegal copies. Bootleg
  software, in general, diminishes the quantity and quality of software
  available for any machine. Giving away copies is as wrong as selling
  copies. Support better software by buying it and encouraging others to
  do so.


Read the README File
  You can access the read.me file from the CLI environment by inserting
  distribution disk #1 into drive dfO: and entering,
     execute dfO:readme
  The readme execute file is one word and there is no ".". The actual data file
  has a "." between "read" and "me.
  The read.me document provides corrections and additions to information
  in the manual. Some information will only be found in the read.me file. It
  is important to read this file.
                              Started



  If you want to send the read.me document to the printer, use the command:
     type> PRT; read.me



Installation Procedure
  The Aztec C system must be installed to a floppy disk or hard disk. To install
  Aztec C from the CLI environment insert your distribution disk labeled #1
  into drive dfO; and enter
     execute dfO:install
  The installation procedure will walk you through the steps to create a
  floppy or hard disk working version of Aztec C.
  It may be useful to read the System Overview Section below, and the rest
  of this chapter before performing the installation. A knowledge of the basic
  system structure and interactions can be useful in executing the install
  procedure.
  The installation procedure will create a default system or a customized
  higher performance system. If you are new to Aztcc C, it is advisable to use
  the default system. The default system sacrifices some code and execution
  efficiency, but it chooses options that require the least amount of effort or
  knowledge. If you require faster, smaller code and faster compile time, then
  choose the customized version. The system configuration can be changed
  later by re-installation. The system configuration can also be changed by
  changing options to the Aztec programs, by changing libraries, or by setting
  different values for environment variables.
  A description of all the files on the distribution disks will be found in the
  read.me file on distribution disk #1.


System Overview
  The Aztec C System is highly configurable. Features and characteristics can
  be enabled, disabled, or changed by user definable options. Some fea-
  tures may also require changing libraries or header files.
  These options give you enormous flexibility. They also require careful
  definition. It is important to understand all of what is required for a
                      Aztec C User Guide



   particular feature. Most of the information needed is provided in this
   manual. Some of the information you need may be in the Amiga system
   manuals.
   The following overview describes features and structures that are useful to
   know to install, modify, and use the Aztec C System.

Basic elements of Aztec C

Types of Flies
   executable files     no filename extension
   library files        .lib filename extension
   header files         .h filename extension

   executable files
          programs
             cc - compiler
              as - assembler
             In -linker
             sdb - source level debugger
             z - source editor
             make - project administrator
          commands
              set - set environment variables
          utilities
              lb - object librarian
              makefd - resident library utility
              cnm - object utility
              ord - object utility
              diff - comparison utility
              grep - pattern search utility

    library files
           math functions - m.lib
           UNIX, ANSI, and general functions - c.lib
           Screen Functions - s.lib
           Amiga ROM kernal functions - see read.me
                      ..; ..~.,.."y Started



   header flies Include:
        the complete standard ANSI headers
        standard Aztec headers
             unbuffered (UNIX) I/O - fcnt1.h
             ROM kernal function prototypes - functions.h
             Inline ROM kernal function calls - functions.h
        the complete standard Amiga headers


Library Flies for Different Data Definitions
   Aztec C supports a number of different data definitions. It would be con-
   venient to have just one set of definitions, but different performance and
   compatibility requirements make it necessary to provide alternatives.
   Most non-commercial users and many commercial users will find the
   default definitions are more than adequate. The data definition in effect
   is determined by compiler options and by the libraries used to link a pro-
   gram.
   The choices marked below with (!) usually produce the smallest and/ or
   fastest code. The items marked with (d) are the system defaults.
   The guidelines for choosing system defaults are to provide the configura-
   tion that requires the least amount of work and knowledge.
   The basic variations for data definitions are:
     int definition
         16 bit (!)
         32 bit (d)
     data and code reference definition
         small code and data (!d)
         large code and data
     floating point definition
         Manx IEEE Floating Point (d)
         Amiga IEEE Floating Point
        Motorola Fast Floating Point (!)
        68881 Floating Point (!)
   Notice that 16 bit ints produce smaller faster code, but 32 bit ints are the
   system default. Why not just default to 16 bit ints? The reason is that Amiga
   supplied routines are based on 32 bit ints. The use of 16 bit ints requires
   special attention when calling Amiga routines. Either the Amiga
                  Aztec C User Guide



parameters that require 32 bit data items must be declared as longs or the
functions.h header file must be included. Likewise, header files are re-
quired for calling some Manx Aztec routines if 16 bit ints are used. To make
Aztec C easier to use, the least complicated configuration is offered as the
default. Experienced users who want the increased speed of 16 bit ints or
some other system enhancements can provide the necessary option to the
compiler, set up different libraries for linking, and include the necessary
header (.h) files in their programs.
The three basic Aztec libraries are c.lib, m.lib, and s.lib. These libraries
assume 32 bit ints, small code and data, and Manx IEEE floating point.
The complete set of c.libs is
   c.lib      32 bit ints   small code and data
   c16.lib    16 bit ints   small code and data
   cl.lib     32 bit ints   large code and data
   cl16.lib   16 bit ints   large code and data
The complete set of s.libs is: s.lib, s16Jib, sl.lib, and s116.lib.
The four basic floating point libraries are:
   m.1ib          Manx IEEE Float
   ma.lib         Amiga IEEE Float
   mf.lib         Motorola Fast Floating Point (FFP)
   m8.lib         68881 Float
Each of these libraries have four variations:
   m.lib, ma.lib, mf.lib, m8.lib         32 bit ints and small code/ data
   ml.lib, mal.lib, mfl.lib, m81.1ib     32 bit ints and large code/ data
   m16.lib, ma16.1ib, mf16.lib, m816.lib 16 bit ints and smallcode/ data
   m116.lib, mal16.lib, mfl16.1ib, and
      m8116.lib                          16 bit ints and large code/ data
So, as an example, if 68881 floats were used with 16 bit ints in large code
and data mode, the linker libraries would be cl16.lib and mS116.lib. The
compiler options would be: -ps, -mcd, and -f8. If screen functions were
used then the sl16.lib library would also be needed.
                     Getting Started



Environment Variables
   Manx Aztec C supports four environment variables. These variables are set
   using the Manx set command. The Amiga CLl environment also has a set
   command. The two commands at the time of this writing are not com-
   patible. One way of avoiding confusion would be to rename the Aztec set
   command to azset or some other unique name. The read.me file may
   contain more recent information on this issue.
   More detailed information on environment variables will be found in the
   Aztec C Reference Manual and in the Aztec C Unitools Manual.
   The four environment variables supported by Aztec C and their as-
   sociated commands are as follows:
      CCOPT5 - default compiler options (compiler - cc)
      CCEDIT - quick fix command line (compiler - cc editor - z)
      INCLUDE - search path(s) for header files (compiler - cc)
      CLlB - search path(s) for libraries (linker - In)


Resident Libraries

   Amlga Workbench
   The Amiga Workbench routines are all accessed through the resident library
   mechanism. Unlike other library routines that are linked in with a program,
   resident library routines are accessed through a dynamic mechanism at run
   time. There are two ways that a program written in Manx Aztec C can
   reference the Workbench resident library routines, by the use of glue
   routines or through inline function calls.
   A complete set of glue routines for the Amiga Workbench is included in
   each of the c.lib libraries. So, when an Amiga Workbench routine is called
   the appropriate glue routine is executed to set up the correct environment
   for the call to the resident routine.
   A faster way to access Amiga Workbench routines is by using inline calls.
   If the header file functions.h is included in a program by coding,
      #include <functions.h>
   then, instead of generating code to call a glue routine, the compiler will
   generate an inline direct call to the Amiga Workbench routine.
                     Aztec C User Guide



   For more information on resident library support see the Aztec C Reference
   Manual Compiler Chapter. For information on Workbench routines see the
   Aztec C Library Manual.

   User Created Resident Libraries
   You can create your own resident library routines. Instructions for creating
   them can be found in the Compiler Chapter of the Aztec C Reference Manual.

#pragmas
   The creation of inline calls to resident library routines is implemented by
   use of the ANSI feature, #pragma. The Compiler Chapter of the Aztec C
   Reference Manual discusses the pragmas provided as part of Aztec C. It in-
   cludes pragmas for resident library calls, registerized function calls, and
   interrupt handler definition.

Pre-complied Headers
   Header files contain definitions for structures, prototypes, and pragmas.
   There are also #define, typedef, and enum statements. Aztec C headers
   contain every kind of C statement except those that produce code.
   It is typical that a very small percentage of a header file is used by anyone
   program. The header functions.h, for example, contains information for
   over 500 Workbench calls, but most programs use only a small fraction of
   them. It is highly convenient, however, to put all of the calls into one
   header file. The penalty is that every time functions.h is included the entire
   contents is processed by the compiler. To maintain the convenience of
   putting everything into one file but to reduce the overhead of compilation,
   Manx Aztec C provides for pre~ompiled header files.
   To make a pre-compiled header file, create a source file with a #include
   statement for each header to be pre-compiled. The compiler is then invoked
   with the -hi option. It is important that any options that effect data defini-
   tion also be specified. The data definitions of a pre-compiled header must
   match the data definition for any compilation that uses it. The compiler
   processes the headers and writes the compiled table information out to a
   file. Later this file is read in by the compiler by specification of the -hi option.
   Since all of the information is in compiled form, the overhead is simply that
   of the I/O to read the data. Pre-compiled headers can save a significant
   amount of time.
                       Getting Started



   A full description of pre-compiled headers can be found in the Compiler
   Chapter of the Aztec C Reference Manual.

Debuggers - db sdb sdbf
   Aztec C for the Amiga has three debuggers, db, sdb, and sdbf. db is an
   assembly language debugger and is described in the Aztec C Reference
   Manual. sdb and sdbf are C source level debuggers. sdb is described in the
   Aztec C Source Debugger Manual. sdbf is identical to sdb except that it
   supports Motorola Fast Floating Point.

Third Party Software
   There are a number of third party software packages, such as Power
   Windows and Amiga Lint, that extend the capabilities of Aztec C. Call the
   Manx sales department for a complete list and current prices of third party
   software.

Freeware, Shareware, and Bulletin Boards
   There is a large body of public domain software for the Amiga. Some
   freeware/shareware is included on the Manx Aztec Distribution disks.
   Some public domain software can be found on the Manx bulletin board.
   Another good place to look is BIX. Information on joining BIX can be found
   in BYTE magazine.
   The Compuserve Arniga conference is accessed by entering,
      go amigatech


   At the time of this writing, Amazing Computing was publishing a com-
   prehensive list of the AMICUS and Fred Fish disks in each issue. Copies of
   the disks are provided for a nominal fee. Their number is 1-800-345-3360.
   Another source of public domain software would be your local Amiga User
   Group.
                    Aztec C User Guide



Multiple Segments and Transient Overlays
   Manx Aztec C supports the creation of multiple segments. Multiple seg-
   ments can be scatter loaded. Scatter loading gets around memory frag-
   mentation problems. Multiple segments can also be dynamically loaded
   as transient overlays. Transient overlays allow very large programs to
   run in a small memory space. More detailed information on this feature
   can be found in the Technical Information and Linker Chapters in the
   Aztec C Reference Manual.

Mixed C and Assembly Code
   Aztec C offers three levels of assembly support: inline, intermediate, and
   separate.
   Inline assembly support allows 680xO assembly statements to be mixed
   directly with C code. The general form for inline assembly is:
           c code
      #asm
           assembly code
      #endasm
           ccode
   The output of the Aztec C compiler is assembly code. Usually the assembler
   is invoked quietly by the compiler, and when the assembler finishes the
   intermediate assembly code is deleted. You can, however, save the inter-
   mediate assembly, modify the code, and invoke the assembler directly.
   Entire assembly level source files can be created, separately assembled, and
   then combined with compiled C modules.
   More detailed information on this topic can be found in the Aztec C Reference
   Manual in the Assembler, Compiler, Linker, and Technical Information
   Chapters.


QuikFix
   QuikFix is a new facility with version 5.0 of Aztec C. QuikFix is an
   interactive interface between the Aztec C compiler and the Z editor, or any
                           Started


editor that supports AREXX (see the read.me file). The compiler is set in
QuikFix mode by specifying the -qf option. The command that is activated
if errors are encountered is defined by the CCEDIT environment variable.

QuikFix Compiler Options
The -qf option tells the compiler to activate the QuikFix environment. For
example:
   cc -qf hello
will compile hello.c and, if there are any errors, execute the CCEDIT
command string.
When QuikFix is activated, the compiler writes specially formatted error
messages to a file called:
   AztecC.Err
If errors are encountered during compilation, the compiler will execute the
contents of the CCEDIT environment variable as an AmigaDOS command.
When the z command finishes with a zero value, the compiler recompiles
the program using the original options. If a non-zero code is returned to
the compiler the compiler terminates with an error.
A convenient way to use QuikFix is to specify the -qf option in the CCOPTS
environment variable. For instance, if you enter:
   set CCOPTS=-qf
in the CLI environment, every time the compiler is run it will run with the
-q£ option appended to the beginning of the option list.

QuikFix Z Editor Options and Commands
The basic CCEDIT specification to invoke z as part of the QuikFix facility
is,
   set "CCEDIT=z -e"
The quotes are mandatory. This string tells the compiler to invoke z if the
-qf option was specified. The -e option tellsz that it was invoked as part of
the QuikFix facility and, more specifically, to issue the :cf command. The
:cf command causes z to read the AztecC.Err file. The AztecC.Err file has
information that indicates the appropriate source file. After reading this
                  Aztec C User Guide



source file, z positions the cursor to the line of the first error. At this point,
z will also display the compiler error message associated with this line.
Three z commands are provided to move from error line to error line. They
are,
   :cp            go to previous error
   :cc            redisplay current error
   :cn            got to next error
The Z Editor Chapter in the Aztec C UniTools Manual describes how to
assign function keys for z via the z.opt file. Assigning ':cpAM', ':ccAM',
':cnAM' to three different function keys can save some time in going
through files with a large number of errors.
If lines are added to or deleted from the source file, it will effect the error
positioning commands. It is a good idea to review the lines in error before
making changes and, if it is practical, to make corrections working back-
wards so that lines added and deleted do not affect the error line positioning
commands.
The editor will only process 25 errors at a time. the :cf command will read
in the next 25 errors.
If z is exited via :q or :wq the compiler will recompile the modified code
using the original options. If z is exited via :cq then the compiler will
terminate with an error status.

Batch Processing with QuikFix
If the compiler is invoked with the -wq option, the AztecC.Err file will be
appended instead of rewritten. This allows multiple compilations to be run
with the errors from each written into one AztecC.Err file. With the -wq
option, a command specified through CCEDIT is not executed.
By invoking z and then issuing the :cf command repetitively you can step
from file to file correcting errors. You do not need to know the names of the
source files.
Invoking z with the -e option is equivalent to invoking z and immediately
issuing the :c£ command.
                     Ge       Started



  Make and QulkFix
  One of the great features of QuikFix is that it can be used in combination
  with the make utility.
  To use QuikFix interactively with make set up CCOPTS to include the -qf
  option or specify -qf with the make CFLAGS macro. Then set the CCEDIT
  environment variable to "CCEDIT=z _e". Then when you use make, z will
  be invoked if there are any source errors during compilation. If the error is
  corrected, the compiler will recompile the source and make will then
  proceed to any additional files that need to be compiled.
  Normally make terminates if there is an error in compilation. With QuikFix
  make will only terminate if the z editor is exited with the :cq command.

  Further Information on QuikFix
  The QuikFix options are documented in the Z Editor Chapter of the Aztec
  C Unitools Manual and in the Compiler Chapter of the Aztec C Reference
  Manual.

System Performance and Compatibility
  The following is a brief discussion of the most significant Aztec C op-
  tions that effect system performanc.
  Running the compiler in small code and small data mode in combination
  with 16 bit ints, produces smaller faster code. The compiler options to
  produce this result are,
     -mcd -ps
  The libraries to specify at link time are c16.lib, m16.lib, and s16lib.
  When 16 bit ints are used, the functions.h header file should be included
  if Amiga Workbench routines are called. For other library calls, the Aztec
  C Library Manual should be consulted. This manual specifies the header
  file (.h) that should be included for each library routine. Each header
  covers multiple routines. It is suggested that you use pre-compiled
  headers. Pre-compiled headers are discussed earlier in this chapter and
  in the Compiler Chapter in the Aztec C Reference Manual.
  To produce even smaller faster code add the -so option,
                     Aztec C User Guide




     -rncd -ps -so
  The compiler option, -so, causes the compiler to perform maximum code
  optimization. It is sometimes difficult to debug with this option on since
  code is rearranged. Some users will run with this option off until the last
  stage of development. Others run with it on as a matter of course.
  To produce faster floating point code, Motorola Fast Floating Point (FFP)
  or 68881 floating point options can be used. With Motorola FFP format,
  floats and doubles are 32 bits as opposed to the 64 bits for IEEE format.
  Thus, the precision is less, but for many applications it is sufficient. The
  compiler option,
     -ff
  must be added to the compiler option list for FFP and the mf.lib libraries
  are used for linking. Make sure that you use the right rnf library. If 16 bit
  ints are used, for instance, it is rnf16.lib. To use the 68881 floating point
  routines, the target machine must have a 68881 co-processor, the com-
  piler option is -f8, and the library is one in the rn8 family. The different
  floating point libraries are discussed earlier in this chapter.
  If you are including a large header file in your program, or a large num-
  ber of smaller header files, compilation time can be speeded up by
  precompiling some header files. Pre-compiled headers are discussed in
  the Overview Section of this chapter.
  The fastest executing software floating point in this package is the
  Motorola Fast Floating point. If you have a 68881 chip then the fastest
  floating point is the 68881 floating point.



Making a Working Copy of Aztec C
  The #1 distribution disk has an installation procedure that is executed by
  placing the disk in drive dfO: and entering,
      execute dfO:install
  This is the preferred installation method.
                           Started



The following is provided for those who may want to customize the
installation beyond what is possible with the install procedure.
1. Make sure that the write protect tabs on the master disks are in the
no-write position.
Tum on your machine. If you own an Amiga 1000, insert the KickStart disk
and wait until it displays the Insert WorkBench screen, and then insert your
standard Workbench boot disk. If you do not own an Amiga 1000, the
Kickstart disk is not required, and you can boot with just your Workbench
disk.
2. From the Workbench, copy your sysl: disk to a blank formatted work
disk, then store your original sysl: disk in a safe place.
3. You should now organize your disks in a manner which will allow you
to comfortably develop applications. How you organize your disks will
depend primarily on whether you have one or two disk drives, and also on
the amount of memory that is available.


A. Two drives and 1 MB or more of memory available.
The #1 distribution disk has an installation procedure that is executed by
placing the disk in drive dfD: and entering,
    execute dfO:install
This is the preferred installation method. The following is provided for
those who may want to customize the installation beyond what is possible
with the install procedure.
Your best approach to setting up this type of system would be to have two
working disks which you regularly boot from for C development, and then
a third disk which is used to hold your actual C programs.

   • Your first disk, which would reside in dfD: at all times, would be
     a simple copy of the sysl: disk.

   • The second disk would contain all utilities, fonts, libraries, etc.,
     that you want to load into the RAM disk.
                 Aztec C User Guide



This may require copying certain directories from your sys1: disk to your
second working disk. In addition, you should copy certain CLI commands
that are not provided on the Aztec disks, such as Format and Diskcopy, from
your own Workbench disk to either the first or second boot disk.
For example, if you wanted to have your Amiga libraries, Aztec libraries,
and CLI commands loaded into RAM, the portion of your Startup-Se-
quence that would accomplish this would be:
   copy dfl;libs ram: NUL
   assign LIBS: ram:
   copy dfl:c ram; NUL
   path ram:
   copy dfl:lib ram:
   set CLIB=ram:

All utilities, include files, etc., that you do not want to load into RAM (or
that will not fit in RAM) should reside on the disk which will be in dfO:.
After booting, you can replace the dfl: disk with your Aztec work disk,
which contains all of your C and object files. The basic idea is to have as
many commands in RAM as possible, so that both dfO: and dfl: can be
used for disk copying, C development, etc., instead of for holding system
fonts and commands.


B. Two drives and less than 1MB of memory available.
The #1 distribution disk has an installation procedure that is executed by
placing the disk in drive dfO: and entering,
     execute dfO:install
This is the preferred installation method. The following is provided for
those who may want to customize the installation beyond what is possible
with the install procedure.
If you have two floppy drives availabIc, you should set up your first disk
to be the Aztec C development disk, containing all necessary files including
the compiler, assembler, etc. The second disk should hold all of your object
modules, C source code, etc.
                   Getting Started



You should first decide which files you will need on disk 1. The directories
you will need to modify include the e directory, bin directory, devs direc-
tory, lib directory, and libs directory.

   • In the e directory, you should delete any eLI commands which
     you do not plan to use, such as Search and Edit. Be sure not to
     delete the Run command, as it is required by the CLI. Also,
     you should copy the Format and Diskcopy commands from
     your Workbench disk if you need them, since the Aztec distribu-
     tion diskettes do not include these commands.

   • In the devs directory, you should delete any devices which you
     do not plan to use, such as narrator.device, (used for speech syn-
     thesis) and printer. device.

   • In the libs directory, you can delete the translator.library, which
     is used by the speech synthesizer. If you are not using transcen-
     dental functions, the mathtrans.library can be deleted; if you are
     not using floating point math in your programs, the
     mathieeedoubbas.library can be deleted. You may also delete
     info.library if you do not plan to use the Workbench in your
     development work.

Libraries
The e libraries you plan to use will depend upon several factors; only the
libraries you intend to use should be included on disk 1. First, if you do not
plan to use floating point math, delete the m.lib library from disk I, as it
will not be needed. Next, make sure only the versions of c.lib and m.lib that
you require (if you need them at all) are on the disk.
The libraries that use large code/large data have the letter "1" in their names,
and libraries that use 16 bit integers have a "16" in their names. These two
types can also be combined. 32 bit ints or small code/small data libraries
have no additional letters. As an example, the large code/large data, 16 bit
integer c library is cl16.lib. The small code/small data, 32 bit c library is
c.lib.
There are four types of math libraries, distinguished by the characters
included in their names (shown in parenthesis):
                 Aztec C User Guide



   • Amiga IEEE floating point emulation (64-bit) libraries (rna)

   • Motorola Fast Floating Point math (32-bit) libraries (mf)

   • Manx IEEE floating point functions (64-bit) (m)

   • The 68881 numeric coprocessor libraries (64-bit) (mB)

As an example, the large code/ large data 32 bit int Amiga IEEE emulation
library is called mal.lib. Note that most of the libraries are contained on the
sys2: disk in the lib directory and should be copied to sysl: if necessary.


C. One floppy drive.
The #1 distribution disk has an installation procedure that is executed by
placing the disk in drive dfO: and entering,
    execute dfO:install
This is the preferred installation method. The following is provided for
those who may want to customize the installation beyond what is possible
with the install procedure.
If you have a one-floppy system, your system will based on a trimmed-
down version of the sysl: disk.

    • From the devs directory, delete narrator. device, and possibly also
      printer.device if you do not need to use a printer.

    • From the libs directory delete the translator.library file. If you
      are not using transcendental functions in your programs, you
      can delete mathtrans.library; if you are not using floating point,
      you can delete the mathieeedoubbas.library.

   • In the lib directory, you should keep only the libraries which
     you need. See the section Libraries, above, for details on the
     libraries that are available.

   • From the C directory, many commands can be deleted. Notably,
     the Edit editor and the search command should be deleted. The
     only command you absolutely cannot delete from the C diree-
                            Started



     tory is the Run command, which is needed by the CLI. You
     should also copy the format and diskcopy commands from your
     existing Workbench disk, as these are not present on the Aztec
     distribution diskettes.


D. Two disk system quick installation.
The #1 distribution disk has an installation procedure that is executed by
placing the disk in drive dfO: and entering,
     execute dfO:install
This is the preferred installation method. The following is provided for
those who may want to customize the installation beyond what is possible
with the install procedure.
If you have two floppy drives and wish to get up and running right away,
you can accomplish this by making duplicates of the first two Aztec disks
(sysl: and sys2:). You then must delete all unnecessary libraries from the
lib directory of sys2:, as well as the entire lint directory (assuming you have
not bought a commercial lint program). See the section Libraries, above,
for details on the libraries that are available.
Then boot with the copy of sysl: in dfO: and with the copy of sys2: in dfl:.
If you plan to follow the tutorial, you should also create a directory called
Aztec on the sys2: disk using the eLI command makedir:
   cd dfl:
   makedir Aztec:
This will provide a simple working environment for you to start with. If
you find this setup too slow and wish to use the RAM dri ve, or simply need
instructions on how to optimize the basic setup, see the instructions in
sections A or H, above.
Using Aztec C with a Hard Disk
The #1 distribution disk has an installation procedure that is executed by
placing the disk in drive dfO: and entering,
    execute dfO:install
                 Aztec C User Guide


This is the preferred installation method. The following is provided for
those who may want to customize the installation beyond what is possible
with the install procedure.
If you have a hard disk, you should install Aztec C onto the hard disk rather
than work from floppies. Hard disk installation is fairly straightforward,
and consists of the following steps:
A. Enter the system directory on your hard disk and click on the CLI. If it
is not there, you may have to start the CLI from your boot floppy. If the CLI
is also not on the boot floppy, you will have to run the Preferences program
to tum on the CLI. See your Amiga User's Manual for details on the
Preferences program.
B. Ensure that you are at the root directory of your hard disk, create a
directory named Aztec at the root level, and enter the Aztec directory :
   cd dhO:
   makedir Aztec
   cd Aztec

C. Insert your sysl: disk into the dfO: drive and type:
   makedir bin
   copy dfO:bin dhO:Aztec/bin
to copy the bin directory from sysl: to your hard disk. Next, copy the
incl.ude directory:
   makedir incl.ude
   copy dfO:incl.ude dhO:aztec/incl.ude ALL

The ALL option for copy specifies that all subdirectories under the in-
cl.ude directory should be recreated on the destination. You should now
copy a program called set from the C directory on sysl: to the logical c:
device:
   copy dfO:c/set c:

The set command will be used later in conjunction with the
Startup-Sequence.
                    Ge       Started



  Now copy the lib directory:
     makedir lib
     copy dfO:lib dhO:aztec/lib


  D. The sysl: disk has now been successfully copied. Remove sysl: and put
  sys2: into dfl. Copy the bin and lib directories from the sys2: disk in
  the same manner that you did for sysl:, but do not create any new direc-
  tories.
  E. Remove the sys2: disk and insert the sys3: disk. Copy its bin and lib
  folders as you did for the sys2: disk.
  F. You now have to modify your Startup-Sequence so that it properly sets
  up your system for use with the Aztec C system. If you boot your hard disk
  system from a floppy, you should insert that floppy now and type:
     cd dfO:s

  If you have an autoboot drive, simply type:
     cd s:

  G. You should now enter your editor of choice and load in the file Startup-
  Sequence. This is a file which is executed when you boot your machine; it
  performs general setup work. At the end of the file you should add the
  following:
     path add dhO:Aztec/bin
     set CLIB=dhO:Aztec/lib
     set INCLUDE=dhO:Aztec/include


If You Have A Problem
  If your Aztec C system is not functioning, repeat the installation procedures
  for your particular hardware / memory setup, paying close attention to each
  step.
  If your Aztec C system is still not functioning, contact Technical Support.
  See Chapter 4, Technical Support, for more information.
                   TUTORIAL




Chapter 3 - Tutorial
  This chapter presents a basic tutorial of Aztec C for the Amiga. For this
  tutorial, it is assumed that you have already followed all of the procedures
  outlined in Chapter 2, Getting Started, and that you are now ready to begin
  using Aztec C.
  This tutorial is meant only to present you with the basics of using the Aztec
  system; you will be referred to other chapters that will give you more
  detailed information about the topics discussed here.


Development Environments
  With Aztec C, the default, or boot, environment is the CLI, however there
  are several public domain shells available which you may want to use in
  place of CLI, which will work fine with Aztec C.


WORKING THROUGH THE TUTORIAL
   This tutorial introduces the eLI and briefly describes some of the more
   important commands you need to know, including how to organize and
   move around among your files; how to enter a program; how to compile,
   assemble, and link your programs; how to set environment variables; and
   how to take ad vantage of the Amiga RAM disk.
                    Aztec C User Guide



Using the ell

STARTING AZTEC C

A. Using floppy disks:
   If your machine is not on, tum it on. If you have an Amiga 1000, insert the
   KickStart disk and wait until it displays the Insert WorkBench screen, but
   do not insert the WorkBench disk.
   If your machine is already on, you must perform a warm boot by holding
   down the control key and pressing the two Amiga keys simultaneously.
   After the boot, you should see the Insert WorkBench screen, but do not
   insert the WorkBench disk.
   Instead of your WorkBench disk, insert the Aztec C disk labeled number 1.
   (Use your working copy--not the original disk!) This disk boots directly into
   the CLI and will display the Aztec startup message.

B. Using a hard disk:
   Boot your hard disk in the usual manner.

       • If your normal boot places you into CLI, type

             cd dhO:aztec
        to invoke Aztec C.

       • If your normal boot does not place you into CLI, then you must
        go into the system directory and look for the CLI icon.

             If there is a CLI icon in your system directory, then
             double click on it to enter CLI.

             If there is not a CLI icon in your system directory, exit
             the system directory, which will place you back at the root
             level. Double click on the Preferences icon, tum on CLI,
             save, then exit Preferences. Go into'the system directory;
             you should now see the CLI icon. Double click on this
             icon to enter CLI.
                          Tutorial



        Once you are in CLI, type
             cd dhO:aztec
        to invoke Aztec C. Refer to your Amiga documentation if you have
        any problems with the above procedure.

C. Startup Message
   When booting from your first floppy disk, you will see the startup message:

      Welcome to the Wonderful World of Aztec C! !
      Version x.x
      XX/xx/xx
   The current date and time is requested:

      Date (MM/DD/YY)?
      Time (HH:MM:SS)?
   Respond to each in the specified format.
   You should see a prompt that looks like:

      1 >
   This is the standard CLI prompt; it indicates that the CLI is waiting for a
   command.

LOOKING AROUND
   To begin, type the following command to the CLI:
      info
   This command displays information about the disks that are currently in
   the disk drives. It tells you exactly how much space is free on each of your
   disks.
   The Amiga supports what is known as a "hierarchical" file structure that is
   used to organize files on the disk. An analogy may help to explain this.
   Think of a disk as a closet where you want to store different sorts of items.
   Each disk you have can be thought of as a different closet. If you stuffed all
   the items you have into this closet, it would become cluttered, making it
   difficult to find individual items.
                  Aztec C User Guide



So to be more organized, you can let your closet have different sections
inside. Now you can have a section labeled "sports" and another labeled
"cloth-2s". You can still save other items in this closet as well.
If you go into the "sports" section of your closet, you can have all your sports
equipment there, or you can have some more sections inside the "sports"
section that are labeled "baseball," "football," and "tennis." This could go on
for quite a bit, but you should get the idea. With the Amiga, you can create
exactly this kind of organization on your disks.
The name you use when talking about a "section" on the disk is a "directory."
Type the command:
   dir
This is short for DIRectory and displays the contents of the current directory
(or "section") that you are in. You will notice that the first set of files
displayed is followed by the word dir. This is short for "directory" and
indicates that there are some additional directories inside the current direc-
tory.
To go into one of these directories, type:
    cd inc1ude
where inc1ude is the name of one of the files in your previous display that
was followed by the word dir. The cd command is short for "Change
Directory." Now you are in the include directory and another dir com-
mand will show you its contents---probably some more directories and
some more items.
If you are not sure where you are at any time, type:
    cd
to find your current directory, or location. The first name will be master
directory that you are in-usually dfO: or dfl :, depending upon which
drive you are using. This is followed by the name of each subdirectory that
you went through to reach the current directory. Each name is separated
from the preceding name by a "/" character.
You can move among directories by using the cd command and typing the
full name of the directory you want. For example, to go into the dfD :
drive's c directory with the first di:z:' command, type:
    cd dfD:c
                         Tutorial



  If the directory does not exist, an error message is displayed.
  Once you are in the c directory, try the dir command. You will notice that
  some of the files listed have familiar names like cd, dir, format and dis-
  kcopy. This is the command directory and is where the CLI gets all the
  commands that it executes.
  To move again, type:
     cd dfO:include/exec
  This places you into the exec directory, which is in the include directory,
  which is on the dfO: disk.
  Now, instead of dir type:
     list
  This command is like dir, but it gives more information about each file
  and directory in the current directory.
  A similar command:
     type errno.h
  displays the contents of the file errno . h on the screen of the Amiga.
  The commands info, cd, dir, list and type are the most often used com-
  mands when moving and looking around in the CLI. Try using these
  commands to look in other directories as well.

WORKING WITH FILES
  Move to the top or ROOT directory by typing:
     cd dfO:
  Now, make a directory for your files, to keep them out of the way. Type:
     makedir test
  which creates a new directory named test in the current directory. Go into
  test by typing:
     cd test

  To create a simple program using the copy command, type:
     copy * to hello
                    Aztec C User Guide



  The "*" tells the copy command to get the source from the keyboard and the
  to says to put what it gets into the file hello.
  The disk whirs and the cursor waits for input without a prompt. Now, type
  the following short program, exactly as it is written here:
     main()
     {
     printf ("hello world!! \n") ;
     }


  To tell the copy command you are done, hold down the ctrl key and press
  the \ key. You should see the eLI prompt once again.
  To make sure the file is correct, use the type command again to display the
  file to the screen. Proof the text that is displayed against the above program;
  they should be identical.
  If you now type dir, you will see the file hello. Since most e program
  source files are distinguished by a file name extension of .c, use the follow-
  ing command to rename the file:
     rename hello hello.c
  This changes the name of the file hello to hello. c .
  A much better way to create and modify files is to use a text editor. The
  Amiga computer comes with two editors which are described in the
  AmigaDOS User's Manual, ed and edit. Ed is generally considered a much
  better editor than edit, since ed is screen edited, while edit is line-oriented,
  which most people find cumbersome. In addition, Aztec e includes a
  powerful editor named Z, which is similar to the UNIX vi-editor.

COMPILING, ASSEMBLING, AND LINKING
  To make an executable version of your file that you can run, type the
  following to compile and automatically assemble this program:
     cc hello.c
  This invokes the Aztec e compiler to compile the file hello. c; it will also
  automatically assemble the file as wl~ll. Do not worry if you receive an
                            Tutorial



  error: illegal character Oxlb (this is caused by the ctrl-\ sequence we used
  earlier), as it does not affect the code generated.
  Do a dir command and you will see that a new file, hello. 0, has been
  created. This is the object file created by the assembler.
  To turn hello. 0 into an executable file, you need to link it with the c . lib
  library. Type:
     In hello.o -lc
  This invokes the linker to link the hello. 0 module with the standard C
  library and place the output in the file hello. Notice how much disk
  activity takes place during the link phase. The linker is taking all the pieces
  from the library that it needs and is writing them out to the executable file.
  To execute the program, type:
     hello

  The words

     hello world!!!
  should appear on your screen, followed by a prompt.
  To get rid of the . 0 file, type:
     delete hello.o
  which deletes the file.

ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
  When the linker links with the libraries, or when the compiler includes
  header files, you have to tell them where to find them. The easiest way is
  to use something called an environment variable.
  This is a variable with a name whose value is a string and that can be located
  by any program. Environment variables are created with the set command.
  To see what environment variables currently exist, type:
     set
  and the current environment will be displayed.
                    Aztec C User Guide



  Notice that two items are defined, CLIB and INCLUDE. These were created
  by a command in a file whose full name is dfO:s/Startup-Sequence. The
  command in the file looks like:

     set CLIB=dfO: lib/INCLUDE='dfO: include
  The linker uses the CLIB variable to know where to look for the libraries,
  while the compiler and assembler use the INCLUDE variable to find header
  files.

THE RAM DISK
  When you linked the "hello" program, the linker had to look all over the
  disk for the parts of the library that it needed and then put them together
  to make the program. This is why linking took a while. However, you can
  speed up linking by speeding up the seeking process.
  This is accomplished nicely by using a very fast disk or by using a RAM
  disk. The Amiga computer comes with a built-in RAM disk that lies
  dormant until you want to use it. Since the RAM disk uses up memory that
  is also needed for programs to run, you need at least 512K of memory to
  use it.
  To make the link run faster, you first need to copy the library over to the
  RAM disk. Type:
     copy dfO:Iib/c.Iib ram:
  Now, you need to tell the linker where to look, so type:
    set CLIB=ram:
  which changes the environment variable used by the linker.
  Now if you type:
     In heIIo.o -Ie
  there should be a lot less disk acti vity, and the linking should be much faster.
                       Tutorial



Summary
 This chapter has described only a few of the many features of the Aztec C
 development system. From here, you should go on to read the Compiler,
 Assembler, and Linker chapters of your Aztec C Reference Manual.
 At some point, you should read the entire Reference Manual, as well as the
 Aztec C Library Manual. If you are not already familiar with the AmigaDOS
 CLI commands and options, it would also be well worth your while to read
 the AmigaDOS User's Manual.
 Once you are accustomed to using Aztec C, you can start writing programs
 that access the special features of the Amiga. These features are discussed
 briefly in the Compiler chapter of your Aztec C Reference Manual and in the
 Library Functions chapter of your Aztec C Library Manual. We recommend,
 also, that you purchase the ROM Kernel and the Intuition manuals, as these
 books describe all the functions in detail and provide examples of their use.

 For more information on these and other Amiga-related books, see the
 section "Suggestions For Further Reading" that has been included at the
 front of this manual.
 Now that you have completed the Tutorial, you should know enough to
 create some simple programs using Aztec C. As helpful examples, a number
 of public domain programs have been collected from various sources and
 included on your Aztec C disks.
  Good luck, and enjoy!
        TECHNICAL SUPPORT




Chapter 4 - Technical Support
   We have put together a set of guidelines to help you take the most ad-
   vantage of the technical support service offered by Manx. We ask that you
   read and follow these guidelines to enable us to continue to give you quality
   technical support.

Have Everything With You
   Try to be organized. When using our phone support, have everything you
   need with you at the time you call. Our goal is to give you the help you
   need without keeping you on the phone too long. This can save you a lot
   of time, and if we can keep the calls as short as possible, we can take more
   calls each day. This can be to your advantage on days when we are busy
   and it is hard to get through. Also, have the following information ready
   when you call technical support. We will ask you for this information first.

      • Your name. This is necessary in case we need to get back to you
        with additional information.

      • Phone number. In case we have additional information we will
        be able to contact you. This will never be given to anyone, so
        you need not worry.
                     Aztec C User Guide



      • Name of the product you are using, and its SERIAL NUMBER.
        If you have a cross compiler, please tell us both host and target,
        even if the problem is with only one side of the system.

      • The revision number of the product you are using. This should
        include a letter after the number: i.e., 3.20d or 1.06d. THIS IS
        VERY IMPORTANT. The full version number may be found on
        your distribution disks or when you run the Compiler.

      • The operating system you are using, and also the version.

      • The type of machine you are using.

      • Anything interesting about your machine configuration. i.e.,
        ram disk, hard disk, disk cache software, etc.

Know What Question You Wish To Ask
   If you call with a usage question, please try to have your questions nar-
   rowed down as much as possible. It is easier and quicker for all to answer
   a specific question rather than a general one.

Isolate The Code That Caused The Problem
   If you think you have found a bug in our software, try to create a small
   program that reproduces the problem. If this program is small enough, we
   will take it over the phone; otherwise we would prefer that you mail it to
   us, using the supplied problem report, or leave it on one of our bbs systems.
   Once we receive a "bug report," we will attempt to reproduce the problem
   and, if successful, we will try to have it fixed in the next release. If we cannot
   reproduce the problem, we will contact you for more information.

Use Your C Language Book And Technical Manuals First
   Manx Technical Support is happy to help you with problems or questions
   relative to the operation of our products. If you are having difficulty with
   the C language syntax or a C programming problem in general, please
   check with a C language programming book, or contact a local university
   or user group. If you have questions about machine specific code, i.e.,
   interrupts or DOS calls, check with the technical reference manual for that
   machine and/ or its operating system manual.
                     Technical        ort



When To Expect An Answer
   A normal tum around time for a question is anywhere from two minutes
   to 24 hours, depending on the nature of the question. A few questions, like
   tracing compiler bugs, may take a little longer. If you can call us back the
   next day, or when the person you speak with in technical support recom-
   mends, we will have an in-depth answer for you. But normally we can
   answer your questions immediately.

Use Our Mail-In Service
   It is always easier for us to answer your question if you mail us a letter. (We
   have included copies of our problem report form for your use.) This is
   especially true if you have found a bug with our compiler or other software
   in our package. If you do mail your question in, try to include all of the
   above information, and/or a disk with the problem. Again, please write
   small test programs to reproduce possible bugs. See page 4-5 for the Manx
   mailing address.

Updates, Availability, Prices
   If you have questions about updates, availability of software, or prices,
   please contact the appropriate department. See page 4-5 for a complete
   listing of the Manx addresses and telephone numbers.

Bulletin Board System
   For users of Aztec C, we have a bulletin board system available. See page
   4-5 for the different bulletin board numbers.
    Follow the questions that will be asked after you are connected. When this
    is done, you will be on the system with limited access. To gain a higher
    access level, send mail to SYSOP. Include in this information your serial
    number and what product you have. Within approximately 24 hours you
    should have a higher access level, provided the serial number is valid. This
    will allow you to look at the various information files and
    upload/ download files.
    To use the bulletin board best, please do not put large (>8 lines) source files
    onto the news system, which we use for an open forum question/answer
    area. Instead, upload the files to the appropriate area, and post a news item
    explaining the problem you are having. Also, the smaller the test program,
                    Aztec C User Guide



   the quicker and easier it is for us to look into the problem, not to mention
   the savings of phone time. When you do post a news item, please date it
   and sign it. This will be very helpful in keeping track of questions. Try to
   do the same with uploaded source files.

Phone Support
   And finally, telephone technical support is provided with the purchase of
   your Aztec C for 90 days from date of purchase. It is available between 10-12
   a.m. and 3-5 p.m. eastern standard time. (Times subject to change without
   notice; for the correct telephone number, see page 4-5.) Phone support is
   available to registered users of Aztec C.
   These guidelines will aid us in helping you quickly through any roadblocks
   you may find in your development.


                            Manx Software Systems
   Address:

                             Manx Software Systems
                                  P.O.Box55
                             Shrewsbury, NJ 07702

   Phones:
        Technical Support                   (201) 542-1795
        Sales (Domestic)                    (800) 221-0440
        Sales (International)               (201) 542-2121
        Updates                             (201) 389-0290
        FAX:                                (201) 542-8386
        Bulletin Board:                     (201) 542-2793
        300/1200 bps
        (all products)


   Note: The above information is subject to change without notice.
MANX PROBLEM REPORT

   Date: __ I __ I __
   Name:_ _ _ _ _ _ __
   Phone #:1-{__}-__-_ _
   Company:. _ _ _ _ _ _ __
   Address :_ _ _ _ _ _ __
   Product
   C86-PC_ C86-CPM86_
   C68k_ _
   C68k-Am__ cII_ _ c80_ _
   c65-ProDos_ _ c65-DOS3.3._ __
   cross _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
   Version #:._ __
   Serial #: _ __
   Op. - sys.:_ _ __
   Machine Config.:_ _ __

Description of problem --
   Include what has already been attempted to fix the problem and use the
   reverse side of this sheet if needed.
                                         Index
    68020,1-1
    68881,1-1

A
    add-on products, 1-1, 1-3
    Amiga 1000, 2-2
    Amiga 2000, 2-2
    Amiga 2500, 2-2
    Amiga 500, 2-2
    ANSI standard, 1-6
    assembly and C mixed, 2-10
    autoboot
         Startup-Sequence, 2-21
    AztecC
         core systems, 1-1
         Developer level, 1-2
         Professional level, 1-2
    Aztec C add-on products
         See add-on products

B
    backing up distribution disks, 2-2
    bin directory, 2-17
    branch shortening, 1-4
    bulletin boards, 2-9

c
    C and assembly mixed, 2-10
    C directory, 2-17
    C libraries, 2-17
    c.lib, 2-17, 3-7
    cc command, 3-6
    cd command, 3-4
    CLI
           default environments, 3-1
           loading into RAM, 2-16
          makedir, 2-19
          Preferences program,2-20
          prompt, 3-3
          run command, 2-17
          using CLI, 3-2
    CLI commands
          cd,3-4
          copy, 3-5 - 3-6
          delete, 3-7
          dir, 3-4
          info, 3-3
          list, 3-5
          rename, 3-6
          type,3-5
    CLI icon, 3-2
    CLIB environment variable, 3-8
    compile, 3-6
    components, Aztec C
          debuggers, 2-9
          files, 2-4 - 2-5
          libraries, 2-5 - 2-6
          pragmas, 2-8
          pre-compiled header files, 2-8
          resident libraries, 2-7
    copy command, 3-5 - 3-6
          example, 3-8
    core systems, 1-1-1-2
    cross development, 1-3

D
    data definitions, 2-5 - 2-6
    debuggers, 2-9
    delete command, 3-7
    Developer System, 1-2
    development environments
          choice of, 3-1
    device drivers, 1-1
    devs directory, 2-17
    diff,l-2
    dir command, 3-4


                                      ii
    directory
          command, 3-4
          definition, 3-4
          display current, 3-4 - 3-5
    Diskcopy command, 2-16
    documentation, 1-1, 1-3
          reading order, 1-4 - 1-5
    draft-proposed ANSI, 1-6

E
    ed,3-6
    edit,3-6
    editor, 3-6
    environment variables, 2-7,3-7
          CCEDIT, 2-11 - 2-13
          CCOPTS, 2-11,2-13
          CLIB,3-8
          INCLUDE,3-8
    executable file, 3-7

F
    file structure, 3-3
    file types, 2-4 - 2-5
    floating point libraries, 2-14, 2-17 - 2-18
           16 bit int library, 2-17
           32 bit int library, 2-18
           64 bit int library, 2-18
           68881 coprocessor, 2-18
           Amiga IEEE, 2-18
           large code/large data, 2-17
           Manx IEEE, 2-18
           Motorola Fast Floating Point, 2-18
           small code/small data, 2-17
    Format command, 2-16
    freeware, 2-9
    functions.h, 2-5 - 2-8,2-13
           -hi compiler option, 2-8




                                        iii
G
    grep, 1-2

H
    hard disk, using Aztec C with, 2-19


    include directory, 2-20
    INCLUDE environment variable, 3-8
    info command, 3-3,3-5
    installation procedure, 1-4, 2-3, 2-14
          hard disk, 2-19 - 2-21
          one floppy drive, 2-18
          two drives + 1 MB memory, 2-15 - 2-16
          two drives + less than 1 MB memory, 2-16 - 2-17
          two drives, quick installation, 2-19
    Intuition, 1-1

L
    large code/large data, 2-17
    lib directory, 2-17
    library source, 1-3
    libs directory, 2-17
    link,3-7
    linking, 3-7 - 3-8
    lint directory, 2-19
    list command, 3-5

M
    m.lib,2-17
    make, 1-2
    makedir command, 2-19, 2-21
    math libraries, 2-17
         See also floating point libraries
    multiple segment support, 2-10

N
    notation conventions, 1-5


                                      iv
o
    object file, 3-7
    overlay support, 2-10

p
    pragmas, 2-8
    pre-compiled header files
         -hi compiler option, 2-8
    Preferences program, 2-20,3-2
    Professional System, 1-2

Q
    quick installation, 2-19
    QuikFix, 2-10
         -qf compiler option, 2-11
         -wq compiler option, 2-12
         ARE XX, 2-11
         batch processing, 2-12
         further information, 2-13
         make utility, 2-13
         Z editor commands, 2-11 - 2-12
         Z editor options, 2-11

R
    RAM disk, 2-15, 3-8
          system requirements, 3-8
    RAM loading, 2-16
    reading order, 1-4
    README file, 1-4, 2-2 - 2-3
    resident libraries
          Amiga Workbench, 2-7
          user created, 2-8
    root directory
          defined, 3-5
    Run command,2-17,2-19




                                     v
s
    sdb, 1-3,2-2
    set command, Amiga CLI,2-7
    set command, Aztec, 2-7,2-20,3-7
    shareware, 2-9
    small code/small data, 2-17
    source level debugger, 1-3, 2-2
          See also sdb
    starting Aztec C
          with floppy disks, 3-2
          with hard disk, 3-2
    startup message, 3-3
    Startup-Sequence, 2-16
    system overview, 2-3
    system requirements, 2-1 - 2-2, 2-15 - 2-16

T
    technical support, 4-1
          bulletin board system, 4-3
          mail-in service, 4-3
          phone hours, 4-4
          phone number, 4-4
          phone support, 4-4
          procedures, 4-2 - 4-3
          required info, 4-1 - 4-2
          updates, 4-3
    text editor, 3-6
    third party software, 2-9
    transcendental functions, 2-17
    U
    UniTools, 1-2, 1-5
    UNIX, 1-1-1-2, 3-6

w
    write protect tabs, 2-15

z
    z editor, 1-2,3-6


                                       vi
Aztec C Reference Manual
         for the
          Amiga

                    Version 5.0
                   October 1989




Copyright © 1988,1989 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.
                All Rights Reserved
                    Worldwide

                DISTRIBUTED BY:

              Manx Software Systems
                   P.O. Box 55
              Shrewsbury, NJ 07702
                 (201) 542-2121
USE RESTRICTIONS
  You are permitted to install and use this product on· a single computer.
  Multiple CPU systems require supplementary licenses.
  Before using any Aztec C products, the License Registration included with
  this product must be signed and mailed to:

                           Manx Software Systems
                                P.O. Box 55
                           Shrewsbury, NJ 07702

COPYRIGHT
  This software package and document are copyrighted ©1988, 1989 by Manx
  Software Systems. All rights reserved worldwide.
  No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, transcribed,
  stored in any retrieval system, or translated into any language without prior
  written permission of Manx Software Systems.

DISCLAIMER
  Manx Software Systems makes no representations or warranties with
  respect to this product and specifically disclaims any implied warranties of
  merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose. Manx Software Sys-
  tems reserves the right to modify the programs and revise the contents of
  the manual without obligation to notify any person of such revision or
  changes.

TRADEMARKS
  Aztec C, Manx AS, Manx LN, Z, and SDB are trademarks of Manx Software
  Systems. CP IM-86 and CP 1M-SO are trademarks of Digital Research.
  MSDOS is a trademark of Microsoft. PCDOS is a trademark of IBM. UNIX
  is a trademark of AT&T Bell Laboratories. Macintosh and Apple II are
  trademarks of Apple Computer. Atari is a trademark of Atari Computers.
  Amiga is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga.
Manual Revision History

       October 1989       Fifth Edition
       December 1988      Fourth Edition
       May 1988           Third Edition
       April 1986         Second Edition
       February 1986      First Edition
                                             Table of Contents

Chapter 1 - Overview
  Introduction                                                    1-1
       ANSI C ................................................ 1-1


Chapter 2 - Compiler
  Using the Compiler ..................................... 2-1
       Input File .............................................. 2-2
          Source Filename Extensions ........................... 2-2
       The Output Files ........................................ 2-3
         Creating an Object File ................................ 2-3
         Creating an Assembly Language File ................... 2-4
       Searching for #include Files .............................. 2-5
          Option -i ............................................ 2-5
          #include Search Order ................................ 2-6
       Pre-compiled #include Files .............................. 2-6
       Memory Models ........................................ 2-8
         Large Data versus Small Data ......................... 2-8
         Large Code Versus Small Code ........................ 2-9
         Selecting a Module's Memory Model .................. 2-12
         Libraries ........................................... 2-12
         Multi-module Programs ............................. 2-13
         Code Segmentation ................................. 2-14
  Compiler Options ..................................... 2-14
       Option Philosophy ..................................... 2-14
       CCOPTS Environment Variable .......................... 2-15
       Option List ............................................ 2-17
       Option Descriptions .................................... 2-21
Option -3 .......................................... 2-21
Option -5 .......................................... 2-22
Option -c2 .......................................... 2-22
Option -d macro .................................... 2-22
Option -fa .......................................... 2-23
Option -ff .......................................... 2-23
Option -fm ......................................... 2-24
Option -f8 .......................................... 2-24
Option -hi filename ................................. 2-24
Option -ho filename ................................. 2-24
Option -i path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2-25
Option -k .......................................... 2-25
Option -mb ............................. . . . . . . . . . . .. 2-26
Option -mc ......................................... 2-26
Option -md ........................................ 2-26
Option -mm ........................................ 2-26
Option -0 filename .................................. 2-27
Option -pa ......................................... 2-27
Option -pb ......................................... 2-27
Option -pe ......................................... 2-27
Option -pI .......................................... 2-27
Option -ps ......................................... 2-28
Option -pt .......................................... 2-28
Option -qa ......................................... 2-28
Option -qf .......................................... 2-29
Option -qp ......................................... 2-29
Option -qq ......................................... 2-29
Option -qs ......................................... 2-29
Option -qv ......................................... 2-29
Option -sf .......................................... 2-29
Option -sn ......................................... 2-30
Option -sp ......................................... 2-30
Option -sr .......................................... 2-30


                                      ii
        Option -ss .......................................... 2-30
        Option -su ......................................... 2-31
        Option -wa ......................................... 2-31
        Option -wd ......................................... 2-31
        Option -wn ......................................... 2-32
        Option -wI ......................................... 2-32
        Option -wo ......................................... 2-32
        Option -wp ......................................... 2-32
        Option -wq ......................................... 2-33
        Option -wr ......................................... 2-33
        Option -wu ......................................... 2-33
        Option -ww ........................................ 2-34
     Table Manipulation Options ............................. 2-34
Error Handling ........................................ 2-34
Writing Programs for the Amiga ......................... 2-35
     #pragma for Amiga Exec Calls .......................... 2-35
        Calling Resident Libraries ........................... 2-36
        Creating Resident Libraries ................... . . . . . . .. 2-38
     #pragma for Register Function Calls ..................... 2-39
     Miscellaneous Notes on Resident Libraries ................ 2-40
     Pointer Considerations ................................. 2-41
        Declare Functions That Return a Pointer ............... 2-41
        Declare Function Arguments That Are Pointers ......... 2-42
        Pointer Variables And Constants As Arguments On Calls 2-42
     Other Considerations ................................... 2-43
        Internal Storage Of Numeric Data ..................... 2-43
        Converting Data .................................... 2-43
     Additional Features .................................... 2-44
       Line Continuation ................................... 2-44
       String Concatenation ................................ 2-44
       In-line Assembly Code ............................... 2-44


                                   iii
Chapter 3 - Language Specification
  Compatibility Issues .................................... 3-1
       Compatibility with Other Aztec Compilers ................. 3-1
  Keywords         . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3-2
  Operators .............•......•......................... 3-2
  Pre-Processing Directives ................................ 3-2
  Type Information ....................................... 3-2
       Integers and Long Integers ............................... 3-3
       Characters ............................................. 3-4
       Structures .............................................. 3-4
       Bitfields ....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3-5
       Enum Constants ........................................ 3-5
       Const and Volatile ...................................... 3-5
  General ANSI-Compatible Features ...................... 3-6
       Function Prototyping and ANSI Function-Definition ........ 3-6
         ANSI Standard ...................................... 3-7
       Auto Aggregate Initialization ............................ 3-10
       Wide Strings and Literals ............................... 3-10
       Structure Assignment and Structure Passing ............... 3-11
       Trigraphs .............................................. 3-11
       Escape Sequences ...................................... 3-12
       Long Character Constants ............................... 3-12
       Register Variables ...................................... 3-13
       Sizeof and Size_t ....................................... 3-13
       Symbol Names ........................................ 3-13
  Preprocessor Features .................................. 3-13
       Predefined Symbols .................................... 3-13


                                                    iv
       String Concatenation ................................... 3-15
       Line Continuation ..................................... 3-15


Chapter 4 - Assembler
  Operating Instructions .................................. 4-2
       EXECUTION ENVIRONMENT ........................... 4-2
         Processor Support .................................... 4-2
       INPUT FILE ............................................ 4-2
       OBJECT CODE FILE .................................... 4-3
       LISTING FILE .......................................... 4-3
       OPTIMIZATIONS                ....................................... 4-3
       SEARCHING FOR INCLUDE FILES ...................... 4-4
         Option -i ............................................ 4-4
         INCLUDE Environment Variable ...................... 4-5
         Include Search Order ................................. 4-5
       MODULE MEMORY MODEL ............................ 4-5
  Assembler Options ..................................... 4-6
       SUMMARY OF OPTIONS ............................... 4-6
       DESCRIPTION OF OPTIONS ............................ 4-7
         Option -c ............................................ 4-7
         Option -d ........................................... 4-7
         Option -0 filename ................................... 4-7
         Option -i ............................................ 4-7
         Option -1 .... . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4-7
  Source Program Structure ................................ 4-8
       COMMENTS ........................................... 4-8
       EXECUTABLE INSTRUCTIONS .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4-8
         LABELS ............................................ 4-8
         OPERATIONS ....................................... 4-8


                                                 v
    OPERANDS ......................................... 4-9
DIRECTIVES .......................................... 4-10
   blanks ............................................. 4-10
   dist and noclist ..................................... 4-10
   cnop ................................................ 4-11
   cseg ................................................ 4-11
   dseg ................................................ 4-11
   dc - Define Constant ................................. 4-12
   dcb - Define Constant Block .......................... 4-12
   ds - Define Storage .................................. 4-13
   entry .............................................. 4-13
   end ......................... " ..................... 4-13
   equ ................................................ 4-13
   equr ............................................... 4-14
   even ................. " ............................ 4-14
   fail ................................................ 4-14
   farcade                                                                                   4-14
   far data ............................................ 4-14
   freg ........ -"" .................................... 4-14
   ifc and ifnc ......................................... 4-15
   ifd and ifnd ........................................ 4-15
   if, else, and endc ................................... 4-15
   near code .......................................... 4-16
   near data ........................................... 4-16
   other ifs ............................................ 4-16
   include ............................................ 4-16
   global and bss ...................................... 4-16
   list and nolist .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4-17
   mUst and nomlist ................................... 4-17
   machine ........................................... 4-17
   macro and endm .................................... 4-17
   mc68851 ........................................... 4-18
   mc68881 ........................................... 4-18


                                          vi
          mexit .............................................. 4-18
          public ............................................. 4-19
          reg ................................................ 4-19
          section ............................................. 4-19
          set ................................................ 4-19
          ttl ................................................. 4-20
          xdef and xref ....................................... 4-20
       MACROCALLS ....................................... 4-20
  Interfacing With C .....•............................... 4-21
       REGISTER CONVENTIONS ............................ 4-21
       ARGUMENTS TO SUBROUTINES ....................... 4-21
         Variable Names ..................................... 4-21
         Returning from a C Function ......................... 4-22


Chapter 5 - Linker
  Introduction to Linking .............•................... 5-2
       LINKING Hello.o ....................................... 5-2
       THE LINKING PROCESS ................................ 5-2
         Libraries ..............................•............. 5-3
       EXAMPLE ............................................. 5-4
         The Order of Library Modules ......................... 5-5
  U sing the Linker .......•••...••........•..•.........••.. 5-7
       STARTING THE LINKER      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5-7
       INPUT FILES   .......................................... 5-8
       EXECUTABLE FILES .................................... 5-8
       LIBRARIES ............................................ 5-9
       SUMMARY OF LINKER OPTIONS ...................... 5-10
       DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF OPTIONS .................. 5-11
         Option -1 ........................................... 5-11


                                 vii
           Option -f .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5-12
           Option +1 .......................................... 5-12
           Option -m .......................................... 5-13
           Option -0 .....••••..•••.......•..•••••........•••. 5-13
           Option +o[i] ........................................ 5-13
           Option +s, +ss, +sss ................................. 5-14
           Option -t ........................................... 5-14
           Option -w .......................................... 5-14
           Option -v .......................................... 5-14
           Options +c and +f ................................... 5-15
           Option -g .......................................... 5-16


Chapter 6 - Utilities
  arev ....••.••.•.......•.•.••.•.......................... 6-2
  adump ..............••................................. 6-3
  cmp   .................•.......................•......... 6-4
  enm   ...••• • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6-5
        Options ................................................ 6-6
        Symbol Format ......................................... 6-7
        Symbol Types .......................................... 6-7
          ab .................................................. 6-8
          pg .................................................. 6-8
          dt .................................................. 6-8
          un .................................................. 6-8
          bs .................................................. 6-9
          Gl .................................................. 6-9

  du ......•...•......................................... 6-10

  hd .......••.•......................................... 6-11



                                                 viii
lb .................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6-12
        Options Argument ........................•............ 6-12
          FUNCTION CODE OPTIONS ........................ 6-12
          QUALIFIER OPTIONS .............................. 6-13
        The mod Argument .................................... 6-13
        Reading Arguments from Another File ................... 6-13
        Basic Features of Ib ..................................... 6-14
           HOW TO CREATE A LIBRARY ....................... 6-14
           HOW TO LIST NAMES OF MODULES IN A LIBRARY .. 6-15
           HOW MODULES GET THEIR NAMES ................ 6-15
           ORDER OF MODULES IN A LIBRARY ................ 6-15
           GETTING LB ARGUMENTS FROM A FILE ............ 6-16
        ADVANCEDlbFEATURES ............................. 6-17
          ADDING MODULES TO A LIBRARY ................. 6-17
          ADDING MODULES BEFORE AN EXISTING MODULE 6-18
          ADDING MODULES AT THE BEGINNING OR END OF A
          LIBRARY .......................................... 6-18
          MOVING MODULES IN A LIBRARY ................. 6-19
          DELETING MODULES .............................. 6-19
          REPLACING MODULES ............................ 6-20
          UNIQUENESS ...... '............................... , 6-20
          EXTRACTING MODULES ........................... 6-21
          THE VERBOSE OPTION ............................. 6-21
          SILENCE OPTION .................................. 6-22
          REBUILDING A LIBRARY ........................... 6-22
          DEFINING THE DEFAULT MODULE EXTENSION .... 6-22
          HELP .............................................. 6-22

Is .............•..............•••..................•... 6-23
mkarcv ..•............................................ 6-25
obd ................................................... 6-26


                                             ix
  ord ................................................... 6-27
  set ..••••......•..••....•...•.....•••••.••.•...•......• 6-28
       Displaying and Setting Environment Variables ............ 6-28

  setdate ••••..•.•••••...•••••••....••••...•.•.•.•...•••• 6-29


Chapter 7 - Debugger
          Requirements ........................................ 7-1
          Preview ............................................. 7-1
  Overview ••••••••••.••••••.••••••••••.•••••...••.••.... 7-2
       BASIC COMMANDS .................................... 7-2
       NAMES ............................................... 7-3
         Code and Data symbols............................... 7-3
         Operator usage of names. ............................. 7-3
       LOADING PROGRAMS AND SYMBOLS .................. 7-3
       BREAKPOINTS ................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7-4
       MEMORY-CHANGE BREAKPOINTS ..................... 7-5
       TRACE MODE ......................................... 7-6
       BACKTRACING ........................................ 7-6
       MACROS .............................................. 7-6
       OTHER FEATURES ..................................... 7-7
  U sing DB .............................................. 7-7
       STARTING DB ......................................... 7-7
       TERMINATION ........................................ 7-8
       SUPPORT FOR SCATTER-LOADED PROGRAMS .......... 7-8
       SUPPORT FOR SEGMENTED PROGRAMS (OVERLAYS) ... 7-8
       INPUT/OUTPUT ....................................... 7-9
       COMMANDS .......................................... 7-9


                                          x
  Definitions .......................................... 7-9
        EXPR ......................................... 7-9
        TERM ....................................... 7-10
        ADDR ....................................... 7-13
        RANGE ...................................... 7-13
        CMDLIST .................................... 7-14
COMMAND DESCRIPTIONS ........................... 7-14
  The Amiga Commands .............................. 7-14
    add ............................................. 7-14
    adi ......"........................................ 7-14
    adl .............................................. 7-14
    adp ............................................. 7-14
    adr ............................................. 7-14
    ai .................................... , .......... 7-15
     ak .................... , ......................... 7-15
    al ........ , ...................................... 7-16
    aL .............................................. 7-16
    an .............................................. 7-17
    aN .............................................. 7-17
    am .............................................. 7-17
    ap .............................................. 7-17
    aP .............................................. 7-17
    aq .............................................. 7-18
    ar ............................................... 7-19
    as ............................................... 7-19
    as .............................................. 7-19
    at ............................................... 7-19
  The Breakpoint Commands .......................... 7-20
     bb .............................................. 7-20
     bw .............................................. 7-20
     bI ............................................... 7-20
     be ............................................... 7-21
     bC .............................................. 7-21


                          xi
  bd .............................................. 7-21
  bh .............................................. 7-22
  bq .............................................. 7-22
  br ............................................... 7-23
  bs ............................................... 7-23
  bt ............................................... 7-24
  bT .............................................. 7-24
  bu .............................................. 7-24
TheOearCommands ............................... 7-25
  cs ............................................... 7-25
The Display Commands ............................. 7-26
   db .............................................. 7-26
   dw .............................................. 7-26
   dl ............................................... 7-26
   d ............................................... 7-26
   dc .............................................. 7-26
   dd .............................................. 7-27
   dg .............................................. 7-27
   ds .............................................. 7-27
The Go commands .................................. 7-28
   g ............................................... 7-28
   G ............................................... 7-28
The Load Commands ................................ 7-29
   Is ............................................... 7-29
The Memory Modification Commands ................ 7-29
   rna .............................................. 7-29
   mb .............................................. 7-30
   mw ............................................. 7-30
   ml .............................................. 7-30
   mc .............................................. 7-30
   mf .............................................. 7-31
   mm ............................................. 7-31
   ms .............................................. 7-31


                       xii
       The Radix Command ................................ 7-32
          n ............................................... 7-32
       The "Print" Command ............................... 7-32
          P ............................................... 7-32
               A complete list of desc_codes .................. 7-37
       The Quit command ................................. 7-39
          q ............................................... 7-39
       The Register command .............................. 7-40
          r ................................................ 7-40
       The Single Step commands ........................... 7-40
          s ................................................ 7-40
          S ............................................... 7-40
          t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7-40
          T ............................................... 7-40
       The Unassemble commands .......................... 7-41
          u ............................................... 7-41
          U ............................................... 7-41
       The Variable commands ............................. 7-42
          v ............................................... 7-42
          V ............................................... 7-42
       The Macro command ................................ 7-42
          x ............................................... 7-42
       The Display Expression Command .................... 7-43
          - ............................................... 7-43
       The Redirect Input/Output Commands ............... 7-43
          < ............................................... 7-43
          > ............................................... 7-43
          » .............................................. 7-43
       The Help command ................................. 7-44
          ? ................................................ 7-44

Command Summary ................................... 7-45
     AMIGA COMMANDS                       ................................. 7-45



                                                xiii
       BREAKPOINT COMMANDS ........................... 7-45
       CLEAR COMMANDS .................................. 7-46
       DISPLAY COMMANDS ................................ 7-46
       GO COMMANDS       ..................................... 7-46
       LOAD COMMANDS ................................... 7-46
       MEMORY MODIFICATION COMMANDS ............... 7-46
       RADIXCOMMAND ................................... 7-46
       FORMATTED PRINT COMMANDS ..................... 7-46
       QUIT COMMAND ..................................... 7-46
       REGISTER COMMAND ................................ 7-47
       SINGLE STEP COMMANDS ............................ 7-47
       UNASSEMBLY COMMANDS ........................... 7-47
       VARIABLE COMMAND ................................ 7-47
       MACRO COMMAND .................................. 7-47
       DISPLAY EXPRESSION ................................ 7-47
       INPUT/OUTPUT COMMANDS ......................... 7-47
       HELPCOMMAND .................................... 7-47


Chapter 8 - Technical Information
  Program Organization ................................... 8-2
       PLACEMENT OF SEGMENTS OF MEMORY .............. 8-3
       SEGMENT SIZE ........................................ 8-4
  Segmentation and Segmented Code ...................... 8-5
       SEGMENTATION ...................................... 8-5
         Loading a Segment ................................... 8-5
         Unloading a Segment ................................. 8-6
         Segload ............................................. 8-6
         Linking and Startup Code ............................. 8-7


                                xiv
        Segment Construction ................................ 8-7
        Segment Data Table .................................. 8-8
        Hunk Data .......................................... 8-8
     SEGMENTED CODE .................................... 8-8
       PrograrnrnerInformation ............................. 8-8
             Global and Static Data .......................... 8-9
       Operator Information ................................. 8-9
       Example ............................................ 8-9
       Including Modules from Libraries ..................... 8-10
       Reselecting Segments ................................ 8-10
Object Module Libraries ............................... 8-11
Assembly Language Functions .......................... 8-11
     CONVENTIONS FOR C CALLABLE, ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE
     FUNCTIONS .......................................... 8-12
       Names of External Functions and Variables ............ 8-12
       Function Calls and Returns ........................... 8-13
       Global Variables .................................... 8-14
       Register Usage ...................................... 8-15
       Embedded. Assembler Source ......................... 8-15
Interrupt Service Routines ....••........................ 8-16
Creating SubTasks ..................................... 8-17
Floating Point Information ............................. 8-18
     CREATING A FLOATING POINT FORMAT PROGRAM ... 8-19
     FLOATING POINT FORMATS .......................... 8-19
Building Programs that Run from Workbench ............ 8-19
     OVERVIEW ........................................... 8-19
     STEP BY STEP ......................................... 8-20




                               xv
Chapter 9 - Error Messages
  List of Error Messages ................................... 9-2
       Compiler Error Messages ................................ 9-2
         Fatal Compiler Error Messages ........................ 9-6
                Internal Errors ................................. 9-7
       Assembler Error Messages ............................... 9-7
         Opcode Error Messages ............................... 9-7
          Directive Error Messages .............................. 9-8
          Syntax Errors ........................................ 9-9
       Unker Error Messages .................................. 9-10
         Command Une Errors: .............................. 9-10
         I/O Errors ......................................... 9-10
         Errors in Use of Memory .............................. 9-11
         Errors Arising From Source Code ...................... 9-11
  Compiler Error Messages ............................... 9-12
       Fatal Compiler Error Messages .......................... 9-58
          Internal Errors ...................................... 9-62
  Assembler Error Messages .............••............... 9-62
       Opcode Error Messages ................................. 9-62
       Directive Error Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 9-66
       Syntax Errors .......................................... 9-69
  Linker Error Messages .................................. 9-69
  Explanation of Linker Error Messages ......•............ 9-70
       Command Une Errors .................................. 9-70
       I/O Errors ............................................ 9-71
       Errors in Use of Memory ................................ 9-73
       Errors Arising From Source Code ........................ 9-74




                                              xvi
                   OVERVIEW



Chapter 1 - Overview

Introduction
  This is the Aztec C Reference Manual and is included as a part of your total
  Aztec C documentation package. See page 1-3 of your Aztec C User Guide
  for a listing of all of the Aztec C configurations and documentation that are
  available for the Amiga.
  The Aztec C User Guide showed you how to install your software and how
  to begin using Aztec C easily and quickly. This Aztec C Reference Manual
  presents more advanced programs and a more thorough understanding of
  how the Aztec C package works.
  The Aztec C Library Manual includes an overview, listing, and description
  of all the library functions that are included with your Aztec C package,
  and a listing of the Amiga Workbench function names and syntax.
  Of course, this Aztec C Reference Manual also contains a detailed Table of
  Contents and an Index.


ANSI C
  Aztec C is fully ANSI standard. If you have used Aztec C prior to Version
  5.0, you should note that this standardization has caused the compiler and
  its options to change substantially. Before using Aztec C, you should
  carefully review the Compiler chapter.
                 Aztec C Reference Manual



Other chapters that have been affected by the ANSI standardization and
should be reviewed include Assembler, Utilities, Technical Information,
Error Mesages, and Style.
If you are a previous user, you should also note that a new chapter has been
added to this manual: Language Specifications. This chapter discusses
Aztec C's implementation of ANSI C.
                   COMPILER



Chapter 2 - Compiler
  This chapter describes how to use the Manx Aztec C Compiler. The Aztec
  C compiler is implemented according to the draft proposed ANSI standard.
  For information on the C language and its use, refer to the section at the
  beginning of your Aztec C User Guide, "Suggestions for Further Reading,"
  which lists several tutorial texts for the C student.
  This chapter contains four topics: 1) how to use the compiler, 2) compiler
  options, 3) error handling, and 4) programmer information, such as the use
  of register variables and the writing of machine-independent code.


Using the Compiler
  To invoke the Aztec C compiler, use the following command:
     cc [options] filename.c

  where [options] specifies optional parameters, and filename.c is the name of
  the file containing the C source program. Options can appear either before
  or after the name of the C source file.
  The compiler reads C source statements from filename.c, translates them to
  assembly language, and writes the results to an output file.
  If the QuikFix option is enabled (option -qf) the compiler on encountering
  errors will dynamically invoke an editor and interactively help locate
                              Aztec C Reference Manual



   source lines with errors. A windowed display is provided of the associated
   error message. This facility is described in the Aztec C User Guide.
   When the compiler is finished, it activates the Manx assembler, unless it is
   told not to. The assembler translates the assembly language source into
   relocatable object code, writes the result to another file, and deletes the
   assembly language source file. Option -a tells the compiler not to start the
   assembler.
   To abort a compilation, press the Control-C keys.


Input File
   When you execute the compiler, the C source input file can be specified as
   a simple filename or as a complete path specification. The default assumes
   that the input file is in the current directory. For example, if the file progl . c
   contains C source and is in the directory dsk2 : db/source, you can
   compile it by using the following command:
      cc dsk2:db/source/progl.c

   If the directory containing this file is also the current directory, you could
   compile the file with the command
      cc progl.c

   And if the current directory is db, on the dsk2 : volume, you could compile
   the file with the command
      cc source/progl.c




Source Filename Extensions
   If the command that starts the compiler does not specify the extension of
   the file containing the C source, the compiler assumes that the extension is
    . c. For example, the command
       cc prog
                                     Compiler



   compiles a file named prog . c in the current directory.
   Although .c is the recommended file extension name, it is not mandatory.
   The specification
       cc prog.prg

   reads the file prog .prg from the current directory as the input to the
   compiler.


The Output Files

Creating an Object File
   Normally, when you compile a C program you are interested in the
   relocatable object code for the program, and not in its assembly language
   source. Because of this, the compiler by default writes the assembly lan-
   guage source for a C program to an intermediate file and then automatically
   starts the assembler. The assembler then translates the assembly language
   source to relocatable object code, writes this code to a file, and erases the
   intermediate file.
   By default, the object code generated by a compiler-started assembler is sent
   to a file whose name is derived from that of the file containing the C source
   by changing its extension to .0. This file is placed in the directory that
   contains the C source file.
   For example, if you started the compiler with the command:
       cc prog.c

   the file prog. 0 is created, containing the relocatable object file for the
   program. You may explicitly specify the name of the object file using the
   compiler option -0. For example, the command
       cc -0 myobj.rel prog.c

    compiles and assembles the C source that is in the file prog. c, writing the
    object code to the file myobj . reI.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



   When the compiler is going to start the assembler automatically, by default
   it writes the assembly language source to the file ctmpxxx.xxx, where xxx
   are numbers chosen such that the file name is unique. The file is placed in
   the directory defined by the CCTEMP environment variable. If CCTEMP
   doesn't exist the file is placed in the current directory.
   The CCTEMP environment variable can be used to pass the intermediate
   assembler file to the assembler through a RAM disk. If you are using floppy
   disks, a RAM disk can definitely save time. If you are using a hard disk, the
   time savings may be minimal.
   If you are interested in the assembler source, but still want the compiler to
   start the assembler, specify option -at when you start the compiler. This
   causes the compiler to send the assembly language source to a file whose
   name is derived from the file containing the C sourc, and whose extension
   is set to .asm. The C source statements are included as comments in the
   assembly language source. For example, the command
      cc -at prog.c

   compiles and assembles prog . c, creating the files prog . a sm and prog . o.

Creating an Assembly Language File
   In some programs, you may not want the compiler to start the assembler
   automatically. For example, you may want to modify the assembly lan-
   guage generated by the compiler for a particular program. In such cases,
   use compiler option -a, which prevents the compiler from starting the
   assembler.
   When you specify option -a, by default the compiler sends the assembly
   language source to a file whose name is derived from that of the C source
   file, by changing the extension to .asm. This file is placed in the same
   directory as the one that contains the C source file. For example, the
   command
      cc -a prog.c

   compiles, without assembling, the C source that is in prog. c, sending the
   assembly language source to prog . asm.
   When using option -a,the -0 option specifies the name of the file to which
   the assembly language source is sent. For example, the command
       cc -a -0 ram:temp.asm prog.c

   compiles, without assembling, the C source in prog. c, sending the as-
   sembly language source to the file temp. asm on the volume named ram:.
   When option -a is used, sub-option -t causes the compiler to include the C
   source statements as comments in the assembly language source. Usually
   you will want to also specify -at to request cc to insert the original C source
   as comment code when it generates the assembly file. (See the "Compiler
   Options" section of this chapter for more information.)


Searching for #include Files
   By default the Aztec C compiler searches the current directory to locate files
   specified in #include statements. It can also search a user-specified se-
   quence of directories for such files, thus allowing program source files and
   header files to be contained in different directories.
    Compiler option -i and the environment variable INCLUDE define the
    directories in which the compiler searches for #include files. The compiler
    automatically searches the current directory for a #include file if the
    following conditions are met:

            (1) the compiler is started without specifying option -i,

            (2) There is not an INCLUDE environment variable, and

            (3) the #include statement does not specify the drive and/or
            directory containing the file.

   If a #include statement specifies either the drive or directory, only that
    location is searched for the file.

Option -i
   Compiler option -i defines a single directory to be searched for the file that
   was specified in a #include statement. The path descriptor follows option
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



   -i. A space between -i and the path descriptor is allowed but not required.


   The specification
      cc -i sys:db/include

   directs the compiler to search the sys: db/ include area when looking for
   an include file.
   Multiple -i options can be specified when starting the compiler, if desired,
   thus defining multiple directories to be searched.
   You can also specify where include files are kept, using the INCLUDE
   environment variable. See your Aztec C User Guide for more information on
   using the INCLUDE environment variable.

#include Search Order
   When the compiler encounters a #include statement, it searches directories
   for the file specified in the statement in the following order:

      • if the filename is delimited by double quotes, "filename," the cur-
        rent directory is searched.

      • if the name is delimited by angle brackets, <filename>, the cur-
        rent directory is searched only if no -i options are specified and if
        the INCLUDE environment variable does not exist.

      • directories specified in option -i are searched, in the order listed
        on the line that started the compiler.

      • directories specified in the INCLUDE environment variable are
        searched, in the order listed.


Pre-compiled #include Files
   To shorten compilation time, the compiler supports pre-compiled #include
   files.
                                         Her



This option only applies to a block of #include files that are located in the
beginning of a file. For example, if you place a #undef between two
#include file statements, it will not have the desired effect.
To use this feature, you must first create the pre-compiled header file. This
is done by compiling the desired header files with -ho option. This option
tells the compiler not to generate any code but to create symbol table
infonnation which it stores in the file whose name was specified after the
-ho option. This symbol table file can then be included on subsequent
compiles by specifying the -hi option followed by the name of the symbol
table file. The compiler adds into its symbol table the pre-compiled symbol
table information. When the compiler encounters an #include statement of
a header file for which it has pre-compiled symbol table information, it does
not have to compile it, even if the include is nested within another include.
This can save a considerable amount of time.
Since there are options that cause the compiler to make different assump-
tions about the size of data items, it is important to use pre-compiled
header files that match the data size assumptions of the compilations where
they are specified.
Option -ho tells the compiler to write its symbol table to a file. The name of
the file follows the -ho and a seperating space as the next argument. For
example, you might create a file named x. c that consists only of include
statements for all the header files that you want pre-compiled. You could
then generate a file named x . clmp that contains the symbol table informa-
tion for these header files by entering the following command:
   cc -ho x.dmp x.c

Option -hi tells the compiler to read pre-compiled symbol table information
from a file and uses the normal include search path. The name of the file
follows the -ho, with one intervening space. For example, to compile the
file prog . c that accesses the header files defined in x. c, and to have the
compiler preload the symbol table information for these files from x . clmp,
enter the following command:
   cc -hi x.clmp prog.c

The -hi option actually initializes the compiler symbol table. For this reason,
only one -hi is permitted, and any conditionally-defined objects are in-
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



   eluded or not, depending on definitions when the pre-compiled header
   Cdmp) file was created, and not when it is used.

Memory Models
   The memory model used by a program determines how the program's
   executable code makes references to code and data. This in tum indirectly
   determines the amount of code and data that the program can have, the
   size of the executable code, and the program's execution speed.


   Before getting into the details of memory models, following is a brief
   description of the sections into which a C-generated program is organized.
   The sections of a program include:

      • code, containing the program's executable code

      • data, containing its global and static data

      • stack, containing its automatic variables, control information,
        and temporary variables

      • heap, an area from which buffers are dynamically allocated.

   There are two attributes to a program's memory model: One attribute
   specifies whether the program uses the LARGE DATA or the SMAll DATA
   memory model and the other attribute specifies whether the program uses
   the LARGE CODE or SMAll CODE memory model.

Large Data versus Small Data
   The fundamental difference between a large data and a small data program
   concerns the way that instructions access data segment data: A large data
   program accesses the data using position-dependent instructions, and a
   small data program accesses the data using position-independent instruc-
   tions. An instruction makes position-dependent reference to data in the
   data segment by specifying the absolute address of the data; it makes a
   position-independent reference to data in the data segment by specifying
   the location as an offset from a reserved address register.
   Other differences between large data and small data programs result from
   this fundamental difference. These other differences are:

         1. There is no limit to the amount of global and static data that
         a large data program can have. A small data program, on the
         other hand, can have 64K bytes at most of global and static
         data.

         2. For a small data program, an address register must be
         reserved to point into the middle of the data segment. This is
         the a4 register in the Amiga.

         3. For a large data program, an instruction that wants to access
         data in the data segment contains the absolute address of the
         data, and hence does not need this address register.

         4. It takes more time to load a code segment for a large data
         program than for a small data program. The reason for this is
         that the absolute address of the data contained in the data seg-
         ment is not known until a program is loaded. Therefore, in-
         structions that access data segment data using absolute
         addresses must be adjusted when the code segment containing
         the instructions is loaded, whereas instructions that access data
         segment data in a position-independent way do not need to be
         adjusted.

         5. A code segment is larger when its program uses large data
         than when it uses small data, because a reference to data in a
         data segment occupies a 32-bit field in a large data instruction,
         and occupies a 16-bit field in a small data instruction.

         6. A program is slower when it uses large data than when it
         uses small data, because it takes more time for an instruction to
         access data when it specifies the absolute address of the data
         than when it specifies the data's offset from an address register.

Large Code Versus Small Code
   The fundamental difference between a large code and a small code program
   concerns the way that instructions in the program refer to locations that are
                          Aztec C Reference Manual



located in the code segment: For a large code program the reference is made
using position-dependent instructions, and for a small code program the
reference is made using position-independent instructions. An instruction
makes position-dependent reference to a code segment location by specify-
ing the absolute address of the location; it makes a position-independent
reference to a code segment location by specifying the location as an offset
from the current program counter. (small code will be used in most cases,
due to the nature of the way it works. Large code is used primarily for
absolute function pointers.)
Other differences in large data and small data programs result from this
fundamental difference. These other differences are:

     1. The size of a code segment is unlimited for both large code and small
     code programs. An instruction in a large code program can directly
     call or jump to the location, regardless of its location in the code
     segment. An instruction in a small code program can only directly call
     or jump to locations that are within 32K bytes of the instruction.

     To allow instructions in small code programs to transfer control to any
     location, regardless of its location in the code segment, a "jump table,"
     which is located in the program's data segment, is used. For example,
     if a location to which an instruction wants to transfer control is more
     than 32K bytes from the instruction, the transfer is made indirectly, via
     the jump table: The instruction calls or jumps to an entry in the jump
     table, which in tum jumps to the desired location. A jump instruction
     in a jump table entry refers to a code segment location using an
     absolute, 32-bit address, and hence can directly access any location in
     the program's code segment.

     When a small code program is linked, the linker automatically builds
     the jump table: If the location to which an instruction wants to transfer
     control is outside the instruction's range, the linker creates a jump table
     entry that jumps to the location and transforms the pc-relative instruc-
     tion into a position-independent call or jump to the jump table entry.

     2. A code segment can contain data as well as executable code. An
     instruction in a large code program can access data located anywhere
     in the code segment, because it accesses code segment data using
     position-dependent instructions, in which the location is referred to
using a 32-bit absolute address. An instruction in a small code program
can only access code segment data that is located within 32K bytes of
the instruction.

3. For a small code program to access the jump table, an address
register needs to be reserved and set up to point into the middle of the
program's data segment. If the program also uses small data, the same
address register is used for both jump table accesses and normal
accesses of data segment data. For a large code program, this address
register is not needed for the referencing of locations in the code
segment.                                            .

4. A program takes longer to load if it uses large code than if it uses
small code. Instructions in a large code program that reference a code
segment location must be adjusted when the program is loaded, since
such instructions must contain the absolute address of the location and
since this is not known until the program is loaded.

Instructions in a small code program that reference code segment
locations need not be adjusted, since they are always independent of
the location at which the code segment is loaded: If the location is
within 32K of the referencing instruction, the instruction is pc-relati ve;
and if it is outside this range, the instruction is a position-independent
jump to a jump table entry.

When a small code program that contains a jump table is loaded, its
jump table entries must be adjusted, since these are jump instructions
to code segment locations, where each instruction must contain the
absolute address of the destination address. However, it should take
less time to adjust the jump table for a small code program than to
adjust the code segment of a large code version of the same program,
since for any destination of a jump or call instruction a small code
version of a program will have at most one jump table entry needing
adjustment, whereas a large code version of the program may have
many jump or call instructions to the same location that need to be
adjusted.

5. A code segment is larger when its program uses large code than
when it uses small code, because instructions that reference code
segment locations by specifying an absolute address use a 32-bit field
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



        to define the location, whereas instructions that reference data by
        specifying a pc-relative address or an offset from an index register use
        a 16-bit field to define the location.

        6. A program is usually slower when it uses large code than when it
        uses small code, because it takes more time for an instruction to
        reference a code segment location when it specifies the absolute ad-
        dress of the data than when it specifies the location in a pc-relative
        form.

        A large small code program that has lots of indirect transfers of control
        via the jump table may not differ much in execution time from a large
        code version of the same program, since the small code indirect
        transfer via the jump table will take more time than the large code
        direct transfer.

Selecting a Module's Memory Model
   You define the memory model to be used by a module when you compile
   the module, by specifying or not specifying the following options:

            -mc   Module uses large code. If this option is not specified,
                  the module will use small code.

            -md   Module uses large data. If this option is not specified,
                  the module uses small data.

   For example, the following commands compile prog.c to use different
   memory models:
      cc prog               small code, small data
      cc -me prog           large code, small data
      cc -md prog           small code, large data
      cc -med prog          large code, large data
libraries
   The modules in the Aztec C libraries use the small code, small data memory
   model. Most libraries have large code and large data equivalents, e.g., cl.lib
   is the large data version of c.lib and may be linked in with -lcl instead of
   -Ie.
   Unless you have extraordinary requirements, you will probably never need
   to use -me on the Amiga. If one of your functions calls another function in
   the same segment that is more than 64K bytes away, the linker automat-
   ically forces the target routine into the application's jump table and directs
   the call through the jump table. See the Amiga ROM Kernel Reference Manual
   for a description of the jump table. Function calls across segment boun-
   daries always go through the jump table.
   Furthermore, your first code segment may be of arbitrary size, again
   without the use of -me or any other special action on your part. The
   application runtime startup code (crtO.o) takes care of fixing up the jump
   table, using information supplied by the linker.
   When you compile a module with -md, all references in that module to
   global and static data are set up as 4-byte absolute values. The use of -md
   is never necessary until the size of the initialized and uninitialized data
   segments (see the output from the linker) exceed 64K bytes. Large-data
   references, Data-to-data references or code-to-data references, are relocated
   by the DOS loader.

Multi-module Programs
   The modules that you link together to form an executable program can use
   different memory models, with the following caveat.
   When large data and small data modules are linked together, the linker
   creates an arbitrarily large data segment, without attempting to sort the
   data into those that are accessed by large data modules and those that are
   accessed by small data modules.
   When the program is running, address register a4, which the small data
   modules use to access data, points 32K from the beginning of this data
   segment.
   Here is the caveat: data that the small data modules attempt to access must
   be within 32K bytes of the location pointed at by a4. The linker detects data
   accesses by small data modules for which this condition is not satisfied, and
   issues a message. If you get this message, try reordering the way in which
   the linker encounters them. If that does not solve the problem, you will have
   to recompile the small data modules, to make them use large data.
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



Code Segmentation
   By default, the linker creates a program that has a single code segment. As
   you have seen, there is no limit on the size of this segment, regardless of the
   memory model used by the program.
   However, there is a limit on the amount of memory in a machine. Also, the
   larger a program'ss code segment, the worse its performance. If the pro-
   gram uses small code, its execution speed degrades as the program gets
   larger, because more transfers of control will have to be done indirectly, via
   the jump table. And if it uses large code, it will be larger and slower than a
   small code version of the same program.
   The Aztec linker allows you to divide a program's code into multiple
   segments. When the program is running, code segments are brought into
   memory as needed. When a code segment is no longer needed in memory,
   the memory it occupied can be released and reused, either for another code
   segment or for some other purpose.
   One advantage of partitioning a large program into code segments is that
   it allows a program to be larger than available memory. Another advantage
   is that it allows the code to use small code memory model without the
   degradation caused by indirect transfers of control via the jump table.
   There is some loss of performance in a segmented program, since the
   segments may be loaded into memory from disk more than once to be
   executed. With careful partitioning of the program, the loss can be mini-
   mized.


Compiler Options

Option Philosophy
   Most of the compiler options are set up as toggles, which means that they
   can be either on or off. Most options default to off. The defaults can be
   changed by creating an environment variable, CCOPTS. Options specified
   directly to the compile command will override options specified through
   the CCOPTS environment variable.
  With a few exceptions, options are grouped around a common function.
  The first letter of an option identifies the group. The group letters are:
     a    Assembly language output control
     b    Debugging control
     c    Chip or processor control
     f    Floating point control
     h    pre-compiled header file control
     m    Memory model control
     p    Parser control
     q    Output control
     r    Register control
     s    Optimization control
     w    Warning control

  After the group letter, one or more individual options may be specified. If
  an individual option letter occurs and is D.Q1 preceded by a 0 (zero), the
  associated option is turned on. Multiple individual options can be
  specified.
  To turn an option off, the character 0 (zero) must appear after the group
  letter and before the options to be turned off. -pOt, for instance, turns off
  trigraphs and -pt turns them on.
  Combinations of options can be used to produce very specific results. To
  enable full ANSI syntax checking with the singular exception of trigraphs,
  for example, you would use the option -paOt. The a option of the p group
  specifies full ANSI which includes trigraphs. The Ot option turns trigraphs
  off. Since options are scanned left to right the combination -paot produces
  the desired result. -pOta would not produce the intended result. Since the a
  option is scanned after the Ot option, the Ot option is cancelled.

CCOPTS Environment Variable
  You can override the default settings of the compiler by using the environ-
  ment variable CCOPTS.
  If you want to use 16 bit ints as the default, for example, you could say
     set CCOPTS=-ps
                         Aztec C Reference Manual



which would cause the compiler to use 16 bit ints instead of the standard
default of 32 bits.
The CCOPTS specification should have no embedded blanks including
both sides of the equal (=) sign. If blanks are used as separators the whole
specification must be enclosed in quotes. Thus:
     set CCOPTS=-ps

or
     set "CCOPTS = -ps"

but not
     set CCOPTS = -ps



Options passed directly to the compiler overide the CCOPTS environment
variable. If the CCOPTS environment variable was set to -ps and you
specified -pOs as a direct option to the compiler, then the CCOPTS -ps
option would be overridded.
If you wish to specify more than one option with the CCOPTS environment
variable, then each option group must be separated by a blank and the
whole string enclosed in quotes. For example,
     set "CCOPTS=-ps -mcd _wo"
would set the -ps, -mc, -md, and -wo options. Note that CCOPTS must be
specified in upper case.


Options that require additional arguments must not be specified using the
CCOPT environment variable. This includes the -0, -d, -i, and -h options.
Option List
     -3    Interpret options that follow according to version 3.6 rules

     -5    Interpret options that follow according to version 5.0 rules

     -a    Causes the compiler not to start the assembler after it has
           compiled a program. Only an assembly file is created.

     -at   Same as -a, but also imbeds C source statements into the
           assembly code.

     -bd   Enables stack depth checking.

     -bs   Produces sdb debugging information

     -c2   Compiler will create 68020 code.

     -d    Defines a symbol for the preprocessor.

     -fa   Generates code for Amiga IEEE floating point.

     -ff   Generates code for Motorola Fast Floating point.

     -fm   Generates code for Manx IEEE. Defaults to on.

     -f8   Generates code for 68881 Floating Point format.

     -hi   Reads pre-compiled header files into its symbol table.

     -ho   Writes compiler symbol table. Used for making pre-com-
           piled header files.

     -i    Specifies path for include files.

     -k    Compile code according to the K&R (UNIX version 7)
           standard

     -ma   Forces alignment of short and long data items. Defaults to
           on.
                      Aztec C Reference Manual


-mb    Generates the public .begin statement. Defaults to on;
       tum off for drivers.

-me    Generates code that uses large code memory model.

-md    Generates code that uses large data memory model.

-me    Aligns strings on word boundaries. This forces all strings
       to start on an even address.

-mm    Puts data in code segment.

-InS   Puts static strings in data segment.

-0     Specifies name to be used for output file.

-pa    Turns on ANSI preprocessor and trigraphs. Turns off
       'cdemou' suboptions for -po

-pb    make bitfield unsigned by default

-pc    Allows extra characters after a #endif or #else. Defaults
       to on.

-pe    Causes enums to occupy only the amount of space
       needed. Defaults to off.

-pl    Defines integers to be 32 bits instead of 16 bits. Defaults to
       on.

-po    Uses old (3.6) preprocessor.

-pp    make characters unsigned by default

-ps    Defines integers to be 16 bits instead of 32 bits.

-pt    Looks for trigraphs in the input stream. Defaults to off.

-pu    Uses unsigned preserving rules.
-qa    Causes generated prototypes to use _PARMS«()) syntax.

-qf    Enables QuikFix.

-qp    Generates prototypes for all non-static functions defined
       within the current file.

-qq    Disables the startup and error messages from being dis-
       played

-qs    Generates prototypes for all static functions defined
       within the current file.

-qv    Generates verbose information on memory usage.

-r4    Uses a4 for register variables.

-sa    Enables two pass assembly for branch squeezing and
       other optimizations.

-sb    Enables use of built-in in-line functions for the string
       operations strcpyO, strcmpO, and strlenO.

-sf    Generates an optimized for(;;) loop that places the test at
       the bottom of the loop.

-sm    Defines the _C_MACROS_ macro to replace some func-
       tions with in-line macro expansions defined in the header
       files.

- sn   If no local variables are created on the stack for a function,
       does not generate the LINK and UNLK instructions.

- so   A shorthand way to specify the suboption 'afmnprs' for -s.

-sp    Delays the popping of arguments until necessary.

-sr    Allocates registers based on weighted usage counts.
                      Aztec C Reference Manual



-55    Finds duplicate strings and replaces them with a pointer
       to the first occurrence.

-su    Allocates registers based on weighted usage counts, but al-
       locates to user specified variables first.

-wa    Complains on arguments which do not match the
       prototype specification.

-wd    Generates warnings for old style K&R definitions.

-we    Quits on warnings. Treats warnings as errors.

-wl.   Shorthand for -waru and stands for lint.

-wn    Do not generate warnings on direct pointer to pointer con-
       versions

-wo    Causes pointer/int conflicts to generate warnings rather
       than errors.

-wp    Generates a warning if a function is called without a
       prototype being defined for a function.

-wq    Prints warnings to the file aztecc.err.

-wr    Warns if function return type does not match declared
       type.

-ws    Ignores all warnings.

-wu    Warns about unused local variables.

-ww    Allows compiler to continue beyond 5 errors.
                                      Compiler                      1'.: : I!I!~I!:~I:I ~;.·.· •·.·b
Option Descriptions

Option-3
   The option(s) following this option will be interpreted according to version
   3.6a syntax. The compiler option specification scheme for version 5 was
   reorganized to make it more coherent and to allow for future requirements.
   The -3 option is provided to reduce the impact of conversion on version
   3.6a users. The document, The Transition from Aztec C version 3 To Aztec C
   version 5 On The Commodore Amiga, should be consulted. The following is a
   simple example of the use of this option,
      cc -3 +x3 +c +d prog.c
   There are several fine points to using the -3 option.

        o The default integer size in version 5 is 32 bits. The default in
           the version 3 compiler and earlier versions was 16 bits. The -
           3 option sets the default integer size to 16 bits to maintain
           compatibility. If 32 bit integers are required, then specify the
           +p or +1 options following the -3 option.

        o If the -3 option is used, options using version 5 syntax can
           be specified before the -3 option or following the -5 option.

        o The -k option is a special case and can be used anywhere in
           the option specification list.

        o The version 3.6a option +xl is no longer supported.
        o The version 3.6a table size options, (-e, -Z, and the like) are ac-
           cepted but have no effect. The version 5 compiler allocates its
           internal memory space dynamically.

        o The version 3 +e option is accepted but has no effect. This op-
           tion is no longer necessary since version 5 always preserves
           the registers that were preserved by this option.
   Setting the CCOPTS environment variable to -3k is a simple effective way
   to delay changing makefiles or other command files that invoke the Aztec
   C compiler using the old style option syntax. The command line looks as
   follows,
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



      set CCOPTS=-3k
   The -3 option is not a global version 3.6a compatibility switch. For a
   discussion of library routines, library names, ANSI syntax changes and
   other version 3.6a to version 5 differences it is strongly advised that you
   consult the transition document cited earlier.

Option -5
   The option(s) following this option will be interpreted according to version
   5.0 syntax. This option is used with the -3 option to allow the specification
   of options using version 5.0 syntax after the specification of options using
   version 3.6a syntax. For example:
      cc -3 +p -D GRAPHICS -e1000 -5 -sn prog.c
Option -c2
   Directly generates 68020 instructions that will take advantage of the 68020
   and 68030 chips. These instructions will not run on a 68000 or 68010.

Option -d macro
   Option -d defines a symbol in the same way as the preprocessor directive,
   #define. Its usage is as follows:
      cc -dmacro[=tex t1 filename
   For example,
       cc -d MAXLEN=1000 prog.c

   is equivalent to inserting the following line at the beginning of the program:
       #define     MAXLEN      1000

   The separating space following the -d is optional. The following formats
   are equivalent:
       -d MAXLEN=1000
       -dMAXLEN=1000

   Since option -d causes a symbol to be defined for the preprocessor, it can
   be used in conjunction with the preprocessor directive, #ifdef, to selectively
   include code in a compilation. A common example is code such as the
   following:
       #ifdef DEBUG
       printf("value: %d\n", i);
       #endif

   This debugging code would be included in the compiled source by the
   following command:
       cc -d DEBUG program.c

   When no substitution text is specified, the symbol is defined as the numeri-
   cal value one.
   This capability is useful when small pieces of code must be altered for
   different operating environments. Rather than maintaining two copies of
   such a program, this compile time switch can be used to generate the code
   needed for a specific environment. For example,
       #ifdef AMIGA
       amigaini t () ;
       #else
       ibminit ();
       #endif

Option -fa
    Use this option when linking with the ma.lib library. Doubles and long
    doubles are represented as 64 bit IEEE format and floats use 32 bit IEEE.
    For support for long doubles, use the -fm option listed below.

Option -ff
    Use this option when linking wi th the fast floating point mf.lib library. Float
    and double are represented as 32 bit values in this library and long doubles
    as 64 bit values.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



Option -fm
   This is the default math option. Use it when linking with the Manx IEEE
   m.lib library. It supports the long double type as 96 bit format, double as
   64 bits, and float as 32 bit.

Option -f8
   Use this option when linking with the m8.lib library. It generates code to
   directly use the 68881 floating point chip.

Option -hi filename
   This option specifies the name of an input file containing pre-compiled
   header file information. The input file is created using the -ho option.
   Separating space between the identifier -hi and the filename is optional.



Option -ho filename
   This option specifies the name of an output file for pre-compiled header
   information. This information is later used with the -hi option to compile
   programs that use the same header files. The use of pre-compiled header
   files can significantly shorten compile times.
   If you are including large header files, like functions.h, in your programs
   you should use pre-compiled header files.
   Separating space between the identifier -ho and the filename is optional.
   Only one pre-compiled header file may be used per compilation, but it may
   contain information from numerous header files. For example, if the C
   source files for a program included the header files stdio . h, fcntl. h,
   math. h, and functions. h, you could speed up the compilation by
   precompiling these files. To do that, create a file named x. c that consists
   of the following lines:
       #include <stdio.h>
       #include <fcntl.h>
       #include <functions.h>
       #include <math.h>
   Create the pre-compiled header file x . dq> using the following command
   line:
       cc -ho x.dq> x.c

   Then, when compiling a source file that includes any of these header files,
   specify -hi x.dmp. If the source file was named prog.c then the command
   line would look as follows:
       cc -hi x.dq> proq.c

   The use of pre-compiled header files does not require any changes to your
   source files. The #include statements remain without change. The only
   difference between programs compiled with and without pre-compiled
   headers should be the -ho specification.
   The list of header files referenced in your source programs and those
   contained in the pre-compiled header file do not have to perfectly match.
   The source program can reference header files that are not pre-compiled
   and the pre-compiled header file can contain headers that are not referenced
   in the source program. The compiler will extract header information from
   the pre-compiled header file and then generate any additional header
   information that is needed.'
   The use of pre-compiled header files may seem a bit complicated at first,
   but for programs that include large header (.h) files the time savings is
   worth the effort of learning how to use them.

Option -I path
   Option -i causes the compiler to search in a specified area for files included
   in the source code.
   The name of the area follows the -i with an optional separating space. For
   example, the following defines directory source/inc on volume sys:
   search area:
       -i sys:source/inc
Option -k
   The -k option causes the compiler to adhere to K&R (UNIX version 7) C
   syntax, rather than ANSI. This option is useful in compiling code written
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



   in Aztec C version 3.6a or some other K&R conforming compiler. The -k
   option is equivalent to compiling with the options -pouOa -woo

Option -mb
   By default the compiler generates:

             public .begin

   The compiler generates the reference to .begin to force loading of the
   program startup code that eventually calls _mainO from the library. If you
   are writing a driver or other piece of stand-alone code, then you do not want
   the standard program startup. So, to avoid getting the standard startup,
   you can either define your own .begin symbol, or compile all files with
   -mOb to prevent the .begin statement from being generated. All libraries
   are compiled with -mOb.

Option -me
   Causes the compiler to define the name _LARGE_CODE, forcing the as-
   sembler to generate 32 bit absolute code references rather than a4 relative
   jump table references.

Option -md
   Causes the compiler to define the name _LARGE_DATA, forcing the as-
   sembler to generate 32 bit absolute data references rather than a4 relative
   references. This memory model is used in some of the header files to switch
   between an external definition of some hardware addresses and a macro
   definition with the address hard-coded in.

Option-mm
   This suppresses all dsegs from being generated by the compiler, which
   causes code and data to be intermixed. This might be useful for some ROM
   applications and has been included here for compatibility with Greenhills
   C.
Option -0 filename
   This option is used to override the default output filename. The separating
   space between the identifier -0 and filename is optional. A detailed discus-
   sion of compiler output files appears earlier in this chapter.

Option-pa
   This switch is used to tum on all the ANSI checking and tum off any special
   extensions. A program which compiles with the -pa flag should compile
   with any other ANSI standard C compiler.

Option -pb
   This option causes bit fields to be treated as unsigned. The version 5 default
   is signed. For example
      int pFlags :3;
   by default defines a bit field whose value ranges from -4 to +3. If the -pb
   option is specified, the range is from 0 to +7.

Option-pe
   By default the size of enums is the same as that of an int. This option places
   them in the smallest space that will contain them. For example, the defini-
   tion:
        enum colors {blue, red, yellOW, white};

   would use a single byte to represent enums of this type if the -pe option
   was used. The definition:
        enum countries {USA, England, France=5, Ger.many}

   would use a two byte word to represent enums of this type when using the
   -pe option.

Option-pi
   Integers are represented as 32 bit format. This is the default setting and
   would be used in conjunction with the c.lib library.
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



Option -ps
   Integers are represented as 16 bit format. With this setting, care needs to be
   taken in calling Amiga library routines which expect 32 bit integers or
   passing integer values to pointers which expect 32 bit values. Use the c16.lib
   library when using this setting.

Option opt
   Trigraphs are an attempt by the ANSI committee to support foreign key-
   boards and printers. Certain characters are represented as two question
   marks followed by another character which indicates the true character
   intended. For example, 71= is equivalent to # and ??( is equivalent to [. In
   most instances, this simply slows down the parser, but it must be supported
   for ANSI compliance. The -pa turns on trigraph checking, but this option
   is included to tum off trigraphs while retaining the rest of the ANSI
   compliance.

Option-qa
   The -qa argument controls how the prototypes are generated. If -qa is
   specified, then a prototype is generated as:
       int func _PARMS«int x, int y»;
   instead of the default:
       int func(int x, int y);
   The first form is used for maximum portability to pre-ANSI compilers. The
   following sequence is usually placed at the beginning of a header file
   containing these style prototypes:
       #if _ANSI_C
       #define _PARMS (x) x
       #else
       #define _PARMS (x) ()
       #endif

   Then, if _ ANS I _Cis defined, the macro will change the above prototype to:
       int func (int x, int y);
   Otherwise if _ AHS r._Cis not defined, the prototype becomes:
      int func ();

   which is the standard declaration of an external function defining the type
   returned by the function.

Option -qf
   The -qf option enables QuikFix which is described in the Aztec C User Guide.


Option -qp
   The -qp and -qs options control whether static functions should have a
   prototype generated or not. Both options may be selected together to get
   all the functions. However, generally, all the global definitions are com-
   bined into one header file included by all files, while static function
   prototypes are placed in each individual file. See also -qa

Option -qq
   The -qq option disables the startup and error count messages from being
   displayed on the screen.

Option -qs
   See the -qp option.

Option -qv
   The -qv or verbose option displays information on memory usage to the
   screen.

Option -sf
   Versions prior to 5.0 of the Aztec C compiler always generated for(;;) loops
   with the tests and increment at the bottom of the loop since this is smaller
   and faster. However, if you had a statement of the type:
       for (i+O;i<n;i++)
          do_something;
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



   then sdb would treat the increment and the test as part of the statement
   since there is no '}' on which to hang it. As a result, if you tried to step
   through the loop, the first s or t command would cause the entire loop to
   be executed.
   Now, the compiler defaults to using the previous style for(ii) loop genera-
   tion where the test and increment are at the top of the loop and are thus
   associated with the for(ii) statement which is better for sdb. The -sf option,
   however, generates faster smaller code.

Option -sn
   Normally, when a function is called, it creates a stack frame using the LINK
   instruction to save register as, point it at the old as, and decrement the stack
   pointer by the amount of local storage needed. Then all references to local
   variables and arguments are made through as. If the -sn option is selected,
   and there is no local storage needed by the function, then the LINK and
   accompanying UNLK instructions are not needed and are eliminated.
   Arguments are accessed using the stack pointer directly.
   (Note: This confuses sdb and causes it to run more slowly.)

Option -sp
   This option saves some small amount of execution time when several
   functions are called one after another. This is accomplished by delaying
   stack operations until necessary and thereby eliminating unnecessary stack
   operations. The stack is corrected whenever it is necessary or if the number
   of bytes delayed exceeds 50 bytes.

Option -sr
   -sr causes the compiler to pick which local variables should be assigned to
   register variables. This option can produce significant savings in code size
   and execu tion speed. This option works in conjunction with the -sn option
   since no local storage is required if all variables end up in registers.

Option -ss
   This option finds duplicate strings and replaces them with a pointer to the
   first occurrence. This also works for common tail subsets of strings. For
   example, if the two strings "highway" and "way" are used in a function, the
   code generated will use a pointer to the fifth letter of highway for the way
   string. If the string ''high'' also occurred, it would be stored separately, since
   it would not match.

Option -su
   This is the same as the -sr option, except that -sr ignores any register
   statements when picking registers, while -su uses these first and then
   allocates any remaining registers.

Option -wa
   Normally, if you call a function in the presence of a prototype, and the type
   of a function parameter does not match the type specified in the prototype,
   the type is coerced as if by assignment. Thus if you pass an int to a function
   expecting a long, the int is quietly cast to a long. This option causes the
   compiler to generate a warning if a quiet cast is generated. This is useful,
   since it allows you to change the code to an explicit cast which is portable
   to pre-ANSI compilers.

Option-wd
   This option generates a warning if a function is defined using the old
   pre-ANSI style definition of the form:
              int function     (a, b)
              int a, b;
             D
   instead of:
             int function     (int a, int b)
             D
   This a useful tool for "ANSI-izing" your programs.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



Option -wn
   The -wn option suppresses warning messages for direct pointer to pointer
   conversions which do not contain an explicit cast, such as the following
   code fragment:
      int *iptr;
      char *cptr;
      cptr = iptr;

   Because the ANSI Standard defines that such direct conversions are illegal,
   the -pa (full ANSI) option will always generate an error for the above code.
   To eliminate the error when -pa is specified, the above could be changed to:
      int *iptr;
      char *cptr;
      cptr = (char*)iptr;




Option -wi
   The -wI option is a short-hand way of specifying the -wa, -wr, and -wu
   options. It is used to force the compiler to do maximum type checking.

Option -wo
   Under ANSI C, pointer-integer conversions are illegal, and are usually a
   problem when 16 bit ints are used. The -wo option changes pointer-integer
   conversion errors into warnings, and has been included for compatibility
   with version 3.6a

Option -wp
   This is useful for determining if a header file is not being included. For
   example, if you use strlenO without including string.h, then -wp will
   generate a warning.
Option -wq
   By default the compiler displays error messages on the screen. This option
   sends them to a file named AztecC.err. This file is used by the QuikFix
   facility.

Option -wr
   Normally, a function is declared without a type, which implies that it
   returns an into However, if there are any return statements, explicit or
   implicit, that do not return a value or that return a value whose type
   disagrees with the type of the function, then a warning is generated for the
   return statements. Thus, the function:
             foo ()
             {
                      printf ("hello \n") ;


   would generate a warning since it should have been declared:

                 void foo ()


   since there is no value returned. The warning would be on the}, which is
   an implicit return statement.

Option -wu
   Since the compiler has the entire tree of the function in memory, it can detect
   that a variable has been declared but has not been used. This option directs
   the compiler to check for such variables and generate a warning for each
   that is not used. For example, the function:
             void foo ()

                      int j;
                      printf("hello\n");


   would generate a warning that j is not used in the function.
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



Option-ww
  Normally the compiler will pause after encountering five errors and ask if
  compilation should continue. The -ww option indicates that the compiler
  should not pause and should continue to the end of compilation.


Table Manipulation Options
   The compiler contains several memory-resident tables in which to store
   information about a program it is compiling.
   Note to previous users: Prior to Version 5.0, these tables were static in size
   with command line options being used to alter the default sizes. The
   compiler now dynamically allocates and frees space for all of its internal
   data and tables. Therefore all previous options which dealt with table sizes
   have been eliminated.


Error Handling
   There are two types of compiler errors--fatal and nonfatal. Fatal errors
   cause the compiler to make a final statement and stop. Running out of
   memory and finding no input are examples of fatal errors. The Error
   Messages chapter describes all these errors in detail. In addition, the
   nonfatal errors are also discussed there.
   The compiler reports any errors it finds in the source file, displaying the
   source line in which the error was detected, with the cursor highlighting
   the approximate point where the error occurred.
   The compiler then displays a line containing the following information:

          1. the name of the source file containing the line
          2. the number of the line within the file
          3. an error code
          4. a message describing the error
          5. the symbol that caused the error, when appropriate.

   The compiler sends error messages to its standard output device. This can
   be redirected to a file in the normal way. Without the redirection of its
  standard output, the compiler sends error messages to the console. For
  example,to compile prog. c and send error messages to the file
  prog . err, use the following command:
     cc > prog.err prog

  When the compiler sends error messages to the screen, it pauses after five
  error messages are displayed, and asks if you want it to continue. If you
  type Y, followed by a <CR>, the compiler continues.
  If you type anything else, followed by a <CR>, the compiler stops.
  When the compiler sends error messages to a device or file other than the
  screen, it processes the entire file without giving the operator the oppor-
  tunity to abort the compilation, even if it detects errors.
  The compiler is not always able to give a precise description of an error.
  Usually, it must proceed to the next item in the file to ascertain that an error
  was encountered. Once an error is found, it is not obvious how to interpret
  the subsequent code, since the compiler cannot second-guess the
  programmer's intentions. This may cause it to flag perfectly good syntax
  as an error. If errors arise at compile time, you should first correct the first
  error, since this may clear up some of the errors that follow.
  The best way to attack an error is first to look up the meaning of the error
  code in the Error Messages chapter. You will find hints there as to what the
  problem might be. And you will find it easier to understand the error and
  the message if you know why the compiler produced that particular code.
  The error codes indicate what the compiler was doing when the error was
  found.


Writing Programs for the Amiga
#pragma for Amiga Exec Calls
   Normally, when a function is called in a program, the code for that function
  is physically made a part of the program by the linker. This is true for all
  the Manx supplied functions that are in the library we provide. On the
  Arniga, there are a number of additional libraries which are used to inter-
  face the program with the operating system and the graphics environment.
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



   Many of these libraries are located in ROM, although some are loaded from
   disk into RAM. Since these routines cannot be loaded into the program, and
   since the physical address of each routine can be different from one version
   of the ROM to another, a dynamic system of calling ROM library routines
   exists on the Amiga.
   The structure and use of resident libraries is discussed in the Amiga Rom
   Kernal Manuals. In brief, each library has a pointer to a library structure.
   Preceding this structure is a jump table with entry points for each function
   in the library. When a library is opened, the pointer to the library structure
   is returned. When a call is made to the library, parameters are placed in the
   appropriate registers, the library pointer is placed in register a6 and the
   appropriate negative offset is called.
   In versions of Aztec C prior to 5.0, when a ROM library routine was called,
   the arguments were pushed on the stack and a small assembly language
   stub was added to the program which pulled the arguments off the stack
   into the appropriate registers, loaded the library base pointer into a6, and
   called the routine. This resulted in a number of small glue routines which
   added overhead both in terms of size and speed.
   The functions pointed to by the library vector would also be an assembly
   language stub that would save registers, set up appropriate registers, push
   the register parameters onto the stack, and then call the function which
   would handle the request.
   Aztec C now also allows the compiler to directly generate the call to the
   ROM library by generating code to load arguments directly into registers,
   load the beginning address into a6 and call the routine. This function is
   implemented using a PRAGMA.
   Pragmas are the ANSI committee's way of allowing extensions to the C
   language in a controlled manner. Essentially, any line beginning with
   #pragma identifier is parsed by the compiler to see if identifier matches any
   that the compiler knows about. If not, the line is ignored.

Calling Resident Libraries
   Making a call to a resident library is very simple with version 5.0 of Aztec
   C through the use of an amicall #pragma statement. (#pragma statements
are the ANSI supported way of doing magic things with the compiler.) An
amicall statement takes the form:
   #pragma amicall (LibBase, offset, fundregl, reg2, ..., regn»
In this statement, the LibBase parameter is the name of the variable which
contains a pointer to the library as returned by OpenLibraryO. offset is the
positive offset value for this function. fune is the actual name of the function
being called. regl through regn are the registers in which the parameters
are passed. For example, the Exec call AllocMemO has a pragma defined
as follows:
   #pragma amicall(SysBase, Oxc6, AllocMem(do,dl»
which declares that SysBase is the variable containing the pointer to Exec's
library base structure. The routine to be called is at offset - (Oxc6) from the
SysBase pointer. The name of the routine is AllocMemO and the two
arguments are to be passed in registers dO and dl respectively.
Now, when the compiler sees a statement like:
   ptr=AllocMem(sizeof(struct Node),\
   MEMF_PUBLICIMEMF_CLEAR);

some form of the following code is generated:
         move.l           a6,-(sp)
         move.l           #14,dO
         move.l           #$lOOO,dl
         move.l           _SysBase,a6
         jsr              -$c6 (a6)
         move. 1          (sp)+,a6
         move. 1          dO,ytr

Thus, no assembly language glue routine is required, since the compiler
handles it all automatically.
For the resident libraries that are a basic part of the Amiga computer, ANSI
style prototypes and amicall pragmas are defined in the file functions.h
which is found in the standard Aztec C include directory. Thus, any file
which contains a reference to an Amiga library call should:
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



      #include <functionS.h>

   Since there are over 500 Amiga functions, pre-compiling functions.h is
   greatly recommended (see the compiler -hi and -ho options).
   So when you are creating your own resident library, the only thing you need
   to do to allow Aztec C programs to make calls to your library is to define
   the appropriate #pragma amicall statements in a header file and the
   compiler will do the rest of the work.

Creating Resident Libraries
   Creating resident libraries is now very simple.
   The distribution disks contain two files that can be modified to create your
   own resident library. The files are libstart.asm and libsup.c. These files
   along with file lib.c are a simple example of the components of a resident
   library.
   The libstartasm file contains the assembly language rom tag structure and
   the assembly language ini tialization required for Aztec C's small model. To
   use this routine in creating your own resident libraries, the only thing that
   needs to be modified is the version number and priority. To modify them
   reference the macros MYVERSION and MYPRI at the beginning of the file.
   The libsup.c file contains data structures and four routines that do in-
   itialization and support. The first data structure is libfunctab. The first
   three entries in this structure are mandatory resident library entries and
   point to routines found in libsup.c. The fourth entry is reserved. The
   following entries are pointers to the user defined library routines. The last
   entry is the end of table code which is a negative one (-1). The sample
   routines func1 and func2 that are coded in this sample should, of course, be
   replaced with names of your own routines.
   The mylnitTab structure does not need to be changed. It points to the
   libfunctab structure and to the startup code in libstart.asm.
   Next you will find data definitions that give the revision level, the name of
   the library, and an ' id' string. The library name should be set to the name
   of the library you are crea ting. The other names, myname and myid, should
                                     Compiler



   not be changed unless the libstart.asm file is modified to mirror the changes
   made.
   The first routine,_main, is called by the startup code when the library is
   first loaded into memory and only then. Once the library is opened,
   additional calls to OpenLibrary will call myOpen which will increment
   the library use count by one. Each time myC10se is called, the library use
   count is decremented by one.
   The myExpunge routine is called when the system requires more memory.
   If the library use count is zero, the resident library is removed and the
   associated memory is freed. If the use count is not zero, then a flag is set so
   that the library will be automatically removed when the open count drops
   to zero. These routines do not have to be changed although they can be
   changed.
   The example has two routines Func1 and Func2 in the file my1ib . c. The
   Funcl routine stores the number passed to it and the Func2 routine adds
   the number passed to it to the number saved by the Funcl routine. Note
   that the only thing special about these routines is the declaration of an
   unitialized variable matching the name of the library base. The compiler
   will automatically assign this variable to the register a6 which contains a
   pointer to the library base when this routine is called.
   The parameters to the function are actually in registers when the function
   is called. However, the compiler will generate code that will correctly deal
   with the the parameters because of the amica11 pragma for each function
   which is defined in the my1ib . h file.
   The file, test.e, contains an example that uses the resident library just
   described. Note that the file my1ib . h is included in test.e and it specifies
   which register to use for each parameter.


#pragma for Register Function Calls
   It is possible to use registers to pass arguments to regular functions. To do
   this use the regeall pragrna which is defined similar to the amicall pragrna.
      #pragma regeal1([return=lfuncname <argl, arg2, ...,argn»
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



  This is interpreted in the same manner. This pragma will affect both the call
  to the function as well as the function itself which will look in the specified
  registers for arguments.


Miscellaneous Notes on Resident Libraries
     • Any function referenced in an amicall or regcall pragma must
       have been previously declared (preferably with a prototype of
       the arguments). For example:

          #pragma           amicall(mylibBase, Oxle, funcl(dO»

       by itself will generate an error, while:

          void funcl(lonq value);
          #pragma amicall(mylibBase, Oxle,funcl(dO»

       is correct.

     • The pragmas, libcall and syscall, are parsed and handled just
       like amicall.

     • If the compiler is invoked with small code or data, each function
       with an amicall pragma saves a4 on entry and loads it with a
       pointer to the libraries data. On exit a4 is restored. If invoked
       with large code and large data, a4 is not affected.

     • The file mylib.fd is included on the distribution disk as an ex-
       ample of a program definition file for the MAPFD program. The
       file specifies parameter passing conventions and function
       names. The MAPFD program then produces a set of #pragmas
       and assembly language glue routines. You can follow this as a
       guideline for process your own libraries with MAPFD. The .fd
       file you create should be saved for possible use with an MAPFD
       program for BASIC or some other language.
                                     Compiler



Pointer Considerations
   Pointers are 32 bits wide in Aztec C compiled programs, whereas ints may
   be 16 or 32 bits wide. Because of this difference, a program whose ints are
   16 bits wide will not work if the program assumes that pointers and ints
   are the same size, and that pointers and ints are treated the same. Since by
   default an int is 32 bits wide, this is only a problem when compiling with
   the -ps option.
   It is easy for a C program to accidentally or purposely make these assump-
   tions, since in C the type of an undeclared function or function argument
   is assumed to be int. A program making these assumptions runs on
   machines for which the assumptions are true, of course. But when you use
   Aztec C to recompile the program, it will malfunction.
   A program that uses pointers should obey the following rules:

      • If a function returns a pointer, explicitly declare it, both in the
        function itself and in any module that calls the function.

      • If a function argument is a pointer, explicitly declare it in the
        function itself, and be careful not to accidentally pass an int as
        the argument.

   The following paragraphs discuss these rules in detail.

Declare Functions That Return a Pointer
   The following code demonstrates the importance of declaring a function
   that returns a pointer, both in the function itself and in a function that calls
   it.
   For this example, assume that the function g must be passed a pointer.
      char *f () ;

      g(fO);

   The compiled code passes the 32-bit pointer returned by the function f to
   the function q. If f was not declared as returning a pointer, the compiled
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



   code, when using the -ps option, assumes that a 16-bit int was returned by
   f, and hence passes only part of the pointer returned by f to g.

Declare Function Arguments That Are Pointers
   The following code demonstrates the importance of declaring that a func-
   tion argument is a pointer in the function itself.
   For this example, assume again thatthe function g must be passed a pointer.
      f(y)
      char *y;


           g(y);



   The compiled code takes the 32-bit pointer y, that is passed to the function
   f, and passes it to the function g. If the declaration char *y is omitted,
   the compiler, when using the -ps option, assumes that y is a 16-bit int, and
   hence generates code that passes only part of the pointer to g.

POinter Variables And Constants As Arguments On Calls
   Code that passes integer constants or variables as function arguments
   where pointers are expected may not work with Aztec C.
   One common problem is attempting to pass the constant int 0 as a null
   pointer. For example, if g is again a function that is passed a pointer, the
   following code demonstrates one way to correctly pass a null pointer to g:
      g( (void *)     0);

   (The code does not have to cast 0 to be a pointer to a void; casting it to be
   a pointer to any other type of object also would work.) If, instead, the code
   says:
      g (0) ;

   with the -ps option, a 16-bit null value is passed, which would be wrong.
Other Considerations

Internal Storage Of Numeric Data
   Programs written for processors that store data items in least significant to
   most significant order may need to be changed. The MC68000 processor
   stores data in most significant to least significant order. This is true of both
   non floating point and floating point data.
   The following short program illustrates a program that runs differently
   depending on the manner in which int data items are stored.
      cput(c)
      int c;
      {
           write (1, &c, 1);


   Problems can also occur reading data created in another environment
   where the data is stored in the reverse order.
   The MC68000 requires that any memory access must be aligned on an even
   address unless it is a single byte access. The Aztec C compiler aligns
   nonbyte data items on even boundaries to avoid memory faults. Code that
   accesses nonbyte data through pointers that specify an odd memory ad-
   dress causes a system crash.

Converting Data
   Programs reading data written in another C environment that does not
   force alignmentwiII probably not produce correct results. Programs writing
   data that will be accessed in an environment that does not force alignment
   will likewise probably fail.
   Some conversion will probably be needed to insert slack bytes to assure
   even alignment when importing data created for an unaligned environ-
   ment, and to remove slack bytes when exporting data for an unaligned
   environment.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



   Most of the common 8-bit microprocessors store numeric data in an order
   that is the reverse of the MC68000. The 808x 16-bit processors and the
   PDP-ll also store numeric items this way.

Additional Features
Line Continuation
   If the compiler finds a source line whose last character is the backslash
   character \, it considers the following line to be part of the current line,
   without the backslash. For example, the following statements define a
   character array containing the string abcdef:
      char arr[]="ab\
      cd\
      ef" ;

String Concatenation
   Character string literals that are adjacent tokens are concatenated into a
   single character string literal. For example, the following statements define
   a character array containing the string abcdef .
      char arr[] = "ab" "cd" "ef";

In-line Assembly Code
   Assembly language code can be interspersed within C source code by
   surrounding the assembly code with the statements #asm and #endasm.
   For example,
      main()
       {
      /* C code */
      #asm
      ; assembly language code
      #endasm
      /* C code */
      }
Since #asm and #endasm are handled by the preprocessor, the compiler
does not actually see the assembly code. Therefore, to assure that the correct
code will be generated, it is a good idea to precede the #asm with a null
statement (i.e., semicolon).
For a discussion of register usage by assembly language programs, see the
Programmer's Infonnation section of the Assembler chapter.
For a discussion of accessing macro definitions, arguments, and automatic
and static variables from within a 'ssm block, see the Technical Informa-
tion chapter.
   LANGUAGE SPECIFICATION



Chapter 3 - Language Specification

Compatibility Issues
  The Aztec C68K compiler for the Amiga is entirely compatible with the
  proposed draft ANSI standard for C. This means that porting programs
  which conform to the ANSI standard to the Aztec C68K compiler should
  be a very straightforward process, with few if any modifications to the code.
   In addition to ANSI compatibility, Aztec C also has a number of library
   functions and compiler switches which provide a fair level of UNIX v7 C,
   UNIX System 3 C, UNIX System V C, and XENIX C compatibility.

Compatibility with Other Aztec Compilers
   Within major release numbers, code may be easily moved from one im-
   plementation of Aztec C to another. For example, moving code from v3.6a
   of the Manx Amiga compiler to v3.6c of the Manx Macintosh compiler is
   fairly simple (except for the differences in machine-specific library func-
   tions). Where release numbers differ (Le., 3.6c and S.Oa), code is generally
   upward compatible, but some changes may be needed to move code down
   to a lower release.
   Note that compatibility between machines exists only with respect to
   source compilation and use of standard library functions. Machine-specific
   functions, such as Amiga Workbench calls, have no direct equivalents on
   other machines such as PCs or Macintoshes. The only library functions
                         Aztec C Reference Manual



  which are portable across Aztec C implementations are those marked
  "Aztec" or "ANSI" in the library function chapter.


Keywords
  auto          double            int          struct
  break         else              long         switch
  case          enum              register     typedef
  char          extern            return       union
  const         float             short        unsigned
  continue      for               signed       void
  default       goto              sizeof       volatile
  do            if                static       while
  pascal


Operators
  [ ] ( ) • -> ++ -- & * +           - - ! / % « »         <   >   <=
  >= __!= A      && II?              = *= /= %= += -=       «= »=
  &= A= 1= , # ##




Pre-Processing Directives
  #if           #ifdef            #ifndef      #elif
  #else         #endif            #include     #define
  #undef        #line             #error       #pragma
  #             #asm              #endasm


Type Information
  The types supported by Aztec C68K and their sizes are listed in the
  following table.
                               Base Type Sizes

        TYPE                                    SIZE (in bits)
       char                                     8
       short int                                16
       int                                      16 or (32)
       long                                     32
       float                                    32
       double                                   (32) or 64
       long double                              32,64, or (96)
       function pointer                         32
       data pointer                             32

  In cases where there is more than one possible size, the default is delineated
  by O. Signed types are the same size as their unsigned counterparts.


Integers and Long Integers
   Integer and long values are stored internally from most significant byte to
   least significant byte (i.e., the normal Motorola 68000 format). This can
   cause problems with programs ported from architectures which use other
   conventions for 16-and 32-bit storage, such as the 8086. For example, a
   program designed for the 8086 which accessed 16-bit values one byte at a
   time would not work properly. Programs that access ints and longs in the
   normal manner should function normally.
   Integers and long integers are also always aligned on an even-address
   boundary. This alignment is required by the 68000 CPU when it has to
   access a 16 or 32-bit value. Programs which attempt to access byte-sized
   data in an integer manner will most likely crash the program. In this
   example
       char *byte_nums = {O, 1, 2, 3, 4};
       int *word_nums, sum;

       word_nums = (int *)byte_nums+1;
       sum = *word_nums + *(word_nums + 1);
   the last line will cause a 68000 exception number 3 (address error).
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



Characters
  The char type is always considered as signed by Aztec C. An unsigned
  character must always be explicitly declared as unsigned char. This may
  cause portability problems when porting code from other compilers/plat-
  forms. For example, the following code will not work as it would on a
  machine which considered chars unsigned:
      char a = 255;

      if   (a > 30)
          printf (lla is bigger than 30\n ll );
      el.se
          printf (na is smal.l.er than 30\nn);
   Although a appears to be set to 255, it is actually considered to contain -1
   (255 translates to 11111111 binary, which is the two's-compliment repre-
   sentation of -1). Therefore, the message a is smal.l.er than 30 will be
   printed. On a machine with unsigned characters, the message a is bigger
   than 30 would be printed.

Structures
   Due to alignment requirements of integer and long values, padding bytes,
   also known as "holes", may exist within a structure. For example:
      struct a struct
         char a_char;
         int an_inti
       };
   In this structure, a padding byte will exist between the a_char and an_ int
   elements to insure that an_ int falls on an even address boundary.
   Because of the existence of holes within structures, the sizeof operator
   will not always return what you would expect. In the above example,
      sizeof (a_struct)
   would return (assuming 32-bit ints) a 6, not a 5. This may cause some
   problems in porting code from environments such as the 8086 and 8-bit
   micros.
                             Language Specifications



Bitfields
   Bitfields are fully supported by Aztec C68K. Bitfields are numbered as per
   normal 68000 convention. For example:
      struct {
         unsigned int bfl : 1;
         unsigned int bf2 : 1;
         unsigned int bf3 : 4;
         bf;
   Here bf1 will correspond to bit 0 in the first word in the structure bf, bf2
   will correspond to bit I, and bf3 will correspond to bits 2-5. As many bit
   fields as possible are put into a single word location. If a bit field entry has
   a length and position such that it would straddle two words, it will be
   moved entirely into the second word, and the remaining bits in the first
   word are considered to be undefined.


Enum Constants
   By default, enum constants are always represented as an int. However, a
   compiler switch will cause enums to be sized to the smallest possible type
   (char, short, int, or long).

Const and Volatile
   Type checking for the const keyword is fully supported by Aztec C68K. This
   means that the compiler will flag the following code as an error:
      const char c_char = 10;
      c_char = 3;
   The volatile keyword is also semantically as well as syntactically sup-
   ported. The compiler will tum off all optimization for any variables of type
   volatile. More specifically, the compiler will never perform register op-
   timizations for volatile variables. The value of the variable will always be
   fetched from the variable's location in main memory.
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



General ANSI-Compatible Features
  Aztec C68k fully supports the ANSI standard. The following describes
  some of the more important ANSI features.

Function Prototyping and ANSI Function-Definition
   ANSI function prototypes and ANSI-style function definitions allow the
   Aztec C compiler to identify incorrect specifications of function arguments.
   A function prototype is a function declaration which informs the compiler
   of the number and type of arguments that the function takes, and the
   function's return type. With this information, the compiler performs exten-
   sive type-checking on function arguments and identifies common errors,
   such as accidentally passing a character pointer instead of a character to a
   function like putcO.
   There are three C constructs involved in function prototypes: function
   declarations, function definitions, and function calls. We will first consider
   the use of these components as described by Brain Kernighan and Dennis
   Ritchie in the book The C Programming Language (from here on referred to
   as "K&R"), which defines the version of C used by Aztec C prior to version
   5.0:
          FUNCTION DECLARATION - Function declarations in K&R only
          identify the return value of a function. This type of declaration will be
          referred to as an OLD-STYLE declaration. The following is an example
           CD double sin C) ;
           @
           @ int positive_sin(d);
           @ double d;
           ® {
           ®          d = sin Cd);
           ®          return Cd> 0.0);
           @

          Line 1 is a DECLARATION of the function sin C) , and states that sin ()
          returns a double-precision floating point number. Without this decla-
          ration, the compiler assumes that sin () returns an int instead of a
          double. This assumption would cause d to contain a random and
                                          ecifications



       incorrect result. It is important to note that a function's return-type is
       the only information conveyed in old-style definitions.
       FUNCTION DEFINITION - The function definition is the one and
       only place where a function is defined. The definition specifies the
       function's return type, arguments, and the actual code comprising the
       function (the body of the function). Using the above example, lines 3-8
       comprise the full definition of the function positive_sin () . Lines
       3 and 4 define the function name, return type, and arguments, and
       lines 5-8 comprise the function body.
       In old-style function definitions, an important rule to remember is that
       arguments of type short or char are always converted to type int.
       Arguments of type float are always converted to double.
       If you pass a function a variable of type float, for example, the compiler
       will automatically convert it to type double before passing it to the
       function (this is called PROMOTION). Thus, its impossible to pass
       variables of types char, short, and float directly to a function when
       old-style definitions are used.
       FUNCTION CALL - Line 6 in the above example shows a call to the
       function sin () , with the double-precision variable d as an argument,
       and d also receiving the return value of sin () . By looking at the
       function declaration of sin () on line 1, we know that sin () does
       indeed return a double value. If we tried to equate a variable of type
       int to sin () , the compiler would issue a warning message that the
       variable did not match the return type.
       However, it is not apparent from the function declaration exactly how
       many arguments sin () takes, nor what their types may be. In fact,
       the compiler does not know the arguments received by sin () either,
       so any variable could be passed to sin () without any compiler
       warnings. Thus, we must rely on memory or reference manuals to
       insure that the correct arguments are passed to sin ().

ANSI Standard
   The ANSI standard has extended the syntax of both the declaration and
   definition of functions to allow the number and types of arguments to be
                        Aztec C Reference Manual


specified in function declarations. For example, the above example could
be re-coded as:
      double sin(double x);

      int positive_sin (d)
      double d;

            d = sin (d);
            return (d> 0.0);

Notice that the first line now contains double x within the parenthesis.
This informs the compiler that the sin () function takes an argument of
type double (the x is there simply for readability; the compiler ignores it).
The compiler will do appropriate error checking. Thus, if we tried to say:
      d   = sin (4);
the compiler will issue a warning message that the type of 4 (int) does
not match the function's required argument type (double) and would
then convert the int into a double.
Look at this a little closer, using another example:
      void other (float size, long time, short stk);

      void test (char c, float f, long 1)

            other (c, 1, 1);

The first line indicates that other has no return value (void), and takes a
float, long, and short argument (in that order). The declaration of
function arguments has some important ramifications:

   • Each argument will be converted, as if by assignment, to the cor-
     responding type specified in the declaration. Thus, c will be con-
     verted from a char to a float, the integer constant 1 will be
     converted to a long, and 1 will be truncated from a long into a
     short.
                                             cations



   • In addition, the compiler will warn that these three items are
     being coerced to fit the function declaration (these type of warn-
     ings can be turned off with compiler switches). The compiler
     will also check to insure that the correct number of arguments
     are being passed and will terminate with an error if too few or
     too many arguments are passed to the function.

   • Default promotions are NOT done on char, short, and
     fl.oat values. Thus the fl.oat parameter in the above example
     will always be passed as a fl.oat, and not as a doubl.e. In es-
     sence, the prototype function declaration defines the default con-
     versions to be done.

It is also important to note that when ANSI prototype-declara tions are used,
a new style of function definition is also used. Rather than declaring the
names of the arguments in parenthesis, then declaring the argument types
below that, the ANSI style declares the argument types and names together
within the parenthesis (as is done on the third line). As a general rule, when
function prototypes are used for a function, you should use the ANSI-
definition style. In the absence of prototypes, you rnayuse either style.
To summarize:

   • If a function definition uses the new ANSI-style, arguments are
     treated exactly as specified in the argument list, regardless of
     whether a new or old-style declaration exists.

   • If a function definition uses the old K&R style, arguments are
     treated as though they have been promoted.

    • If there is an old-style or missing declaration, no checking on ar-
     gument types is done.

    • If an ANSI-prototype declaration is present with an old-style
     definition, then the declaration must use promoted variable
     types (int or double instead of char, short, or float).
                          Aztec C Reference Manual



Auto Aggregate Initialization
   An AGGREGATE type is a generic tenn for a complex C type, and the term
   generally refers to structures and arrays_ ANSI allows a feature known as
   AUTO-AGGREGATE INITIALIZATION, which means essentially that the ag-
   gregate types (structures and arrays) may be initialized as local (auto)
   variables. Two examples of auto--aggregate initialization would be:
      struct st_tag
         int a, b;
      } ;


      void funkier func (void)

            struct st_tag a struct = {O, 1};
            char name [] = "mike";




   The variables a_struct and name are the auto-aggregates that are initial-
   ized. Auto-aggregate initialization is not supported by K&R and is not
   implemented on many UNIX compilers.

Wide Strings and Literals
   Wide literals and strings are used to address the problem of character sets
   which are too large to fit within the constraints of an 8-bit char. Wide
   character constants and string literals are specified by preceding the argu-
   ment with an I or L, and are considered to be of type wchar_t (defined in
   stddef.h). The wchar_t type is defined by Aztec C68K to simply be of type
   char. For example:
      wchar_t *cp = L"ABC";
   is a declaration of wide string literal pointer. As is implied above, wide
   strings and literals are currently implemented exactly the same as normal
   characters and are included only to provide full ANSI compatibility.
Structure Assignment and Structure Passing
  Assignment of one structure to another is supported. In the example:
      struct st {
         int st_typei
         char *st_namei
        st first = {5, "HeY!"}i

      struct st st_secondi
      void func (void)

         st second = st_firsti

   the structure st second will take on the value                        5   for
   st_second. st_type, and Hey! for st_second. st_name .
  Passing of full structures to a function is also legal; the compiler simply
  copies the contents of the structure onto the stack. A function can also return
  a structure as its value.


Trigraphs
  TRIGRAPHS are three-character alternate representations of certain non-al-
   phanumeric characters. They exist primarily for systems which cannot
   input some of the less common non-alphanumeric characters directly from
   the keyboard. The supported trigraphs are:
   Trigraph            Character it represents

      ??=                       #
      ??(                       [
      ??/                       \
      ??)                       ]
      ??'                       1\

      ??<                       {
      ??!                        I
      ??>                       }
      ??-
                          Aztec C Reference Manual


  By default, Aztec C68K does not parse trigraphs. However, tri-graph pars-
  ing may be turned on by means of a compiler switch.

Escape Sequences
  The following character escape sequencescharacter;escape sequences are
  supported by Aztec C68K:

  \'        single-quote.
  \"        double-quote.
  \?        question-mark.
  \\        backslash.
  \a        Alert - flashes the Amiga screen briefly.
  \b        Backspace - Moves the cursor back one space.
  \f        Form feed - Move to the next physical page.
  \n        New line - Move to the start of the next line.
  \r        Carriage return - Move to the start of the current line.
  \t        Horizontal tab - Move to the next tab position.
  \v        Vertical tab - Move to the same horizontal position on the
            next line.
  \x        Hex integer - the digits following the \x define a
            hexadecimal constant.
  \digits   Octal integer - the digits following the \ define an octal
            constant.

Long Character Constants
  Aztec C68K recognizes long character constants. The following code will
  put the ASCII values for a, b, e, and d into the long value 1 :
       long 1;

       1 = 'abed';
  Note that this is different than a string, in that each letter is considered to
  be a character-sized constant, and there is no null appended to the end.
                             Language Specifications



Register Variables
   The Aztec C compiler supports a total of nine register variables. Specifically,
   six data registers (d2-d7, for general non-pointer data) and three address
   registers (a2, a3, a6, for pointers) are reserved for register variables.
   The compiler can automatically allocate register variables based on the
   relative usage of each variable, without an explicit register declaration. This
   behavior is entirely optional and is turned off by default.
   The following types may be declared as register variables:

      • char, short, int, long, pointer, float, double

   In addition to these, the unsigned counterparts of the above may also be
   declared as register.


Size of and Size_t
   The ANSI standard defines a type known as size_t, which is used by a
   number of library functions, and is also the return type of the sizeof
   operator. size_t is always an integral type, and should be large enough to
   contain the size of the largest data element addressable by the compiler. On
   the Aztec C68K system, size_t is defined to be a long. Because size_treturns
   a long, data objects in the large data model may be of any size (in the small
   data model, total data is limited to 64K).

Symbol Names
   All symbol names, both of internal and external linkage, have 31 significant
   characters. Symbols with global scope have a "_" prepended to their names
   internally. This "_" is invisible at the C source level, but is necessary when
   accessing C variables from assembly language.


Preprocessor Features

Predefined Symbols
   The pre-defined preprocessor symbols __FILE_.,..-, __ LINE_, and
   _FUNC_ are fully supported, as per ANSI.
                        Aztec C Reference Manual


   • _FILE_ is a string which expands to the name of the current
     file being compiled

   • _LINE_ expands to an integer representing the current line
     number

   • _FUNC_ expands to a string which specifies the current func-
     tion being compiled.

For example, consider the following C file called test.c:
      void
      funky_func (void)
      {
           printf ("File = '%s'",     FILE_) ;
           printf ("Line = %d",   LlNE_> ;
           printf ("Function = ' %s''',  FUNC_) :



The function funky_func will produce this output when it is called:

   File = 'test.c'
   Line = 5
   Function = 'funky_func'

There are several symbols specific to Aztec C68K that are always predefined
by the compiler. These are: MPU68000, MCH_AMIGA, and AZTEC_C. Also, a
symbol named VERSION is defined and set to 500 (version 5.(0).


Other symbols (also specific to Aztec C) that may be defined are:
SYMBOL              Defined when ...

_INT32                   Integers are 32-bits in length
_LARGE_CODE              The large code model is being used.
_LARGE_DATA              The large data model is being used.
String Concatenation
   String-concatenation is a pre-processor feature which allows two or more
   strings which occur next to each other in C source to be concatenated
   together and treated as one string. For example:
      #define ERROR "ERROR: "
        printf (ERROR "Hey you!
        "A system error has occurred! !");

  In this example, the printf call would print out:

      ERROR: Hey you!         A system error has occurred!!
  There are two useful applications for string concatenation:

      • Long strings may be separated into several short strings. This is
        often desirable to keep the indentation consistent within the
        body of a function. This is why Hey you! and A system
        error has occurred! ! are split-to preserve the indentation
        of the surrounding program, thereby making it easier to read.

      • #defines may be used for common prefixes for strings. In the
        above example, the string ERROR: is assigned to a macro named
        ERROR, which might be a standard prefix for error messages.


Line Continuation
   Logical lines that cannot fit on one line may be continued by use of the line
   continuation character, \ (a backslash), being placed at the end of the
   physical line. For example, the following statements define a character
   array with the contents abcdef :
        char an_array[] = nab\
        cd\
        efn;
   It is useful to note that, in most cases, string concatenation is a preferable
   method to line continuation. This is because string concatenation can
   preserve a program's indentation, whereas line continuation cannot. The
   tabs or spaces used for indenting would show up in the string.
                  ASSEMBLER



Chapter 4 - Assembler
  The Manx Aztec C Assembler, as, translates assembly language source
  statements into relocatable object code.
  Assembler source statements are read from an input text file and the object
  code is written to an output file. A listing file is written if requested. The
  relocatable object code must be linked by the Manx Aztec C Linker ,In,
  before it can be executed. At linkage time it may be combined with other
  object files and run time library routines from system or private libraries.
  Object modules produced from C source text and assembler source text can
  be combined at linkage time into a composite module.
  Assembly language routines are generally not required when program-
  ming in C. Assembly language routines should only be necessary where
  critical execution time or critical size requirements exist. Some system
  interfacing or low level routines may also require assembler code. Even
  when assembler use is indicated, it may not be necessary to write separate
  assembler files. The cc command supports in-line assembler code.

  Information on the MC68000 and MC68020 architecture and instructions
  can be found in the Motorola MC68000 16/32-bit Microprocessor
  Programmer's Reference Manual and the Motorola MC68020 32-bit
  Microprocessor User's Manual, respectively (Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood
  Cliffs, New Jersey 07632).
                     Aztec C Reference Manual



Operating Instructions
   The assembler is started by entering the command line
      as [-options] filename
   where [-options] specify optional parameters and filename is the name of the
   file to be assembled.
   The assembler is also invoked by the C Compiler to assemble its output file.
   The assembler reads assembly source statements from the input file, writes
   the translated relocatable object code to an output file, and if requested
   writes a listing to an output file. The assembler also merges assembly code
   from other files upon encountering an include directive.


EXECUTION ENVIRONMENT

Processor Support
   The assembler supports the MC68010, MC68020, MC68030, and the
   MC68881, MC68851, ins~ruction sets and addressing modes, in addition to
   those of the MC68000.
   The assembler defaults to assuming that only the MC68000 instructions are
   valid. The machine, mc68881, and mc68851 directives enable and/or
   disable the additional instructions and addressing modes.

INPUT FILE
   The input file is a text file that is usually created by a text editor or the Manx
   Aztec C Compiler. The input file resides in the current directory. If it does
   not, a fully qualified or partially qualified path name can be prefixed to the
   filename to designate the source directory. Although .asm is the recom-
   mended filename extension, any extension is acceptable.
   The specification:
       as x
                                                      Assembler



   assembles the file x . asm if it exists. If the file x . asm does not exist then the
   file x is assembled. If the file x does not exist or if file x cannot be assembled,
   then error messages will be returned.


OBJECT CODE FILE
   The assembler writes the object code it produces to a file. By default this file
   is placed in the directory that contains the source file, and its name is
   derived from that of the input file by changing the extension to .0.
   To write the object code to a file in another directory, and/ or to a file having
   another name, use option -0.
   For example, the following command assembles the source in prog . asm,
   sending the object code to the file new. obj. The latter file is placed in the
   current directory, because option -0 does not specify otherwise.
      as -0 new.obj prog.asm


LlSTI NG FI LE
   If you specify option -1, the assembler produces a listing file with the same
   root as the input file and a filename extension of .lst. The listing file displays
   the source statements and their machine language equivalent. The listing
   also indicates the relative displacement of each machine instruction.


OPTIMIZATIONS
   By default, the assembler performs some optimizations on an assembly
   language source file,by making two passes through the assembly source
   file.
   Option -n disables some optimization, thereby allowing the assembler to
   run faster because it makes only a single pass through the source and
   because it does not optimize the code. However, usage of the -n option
   makes the resultant code larger and slower.
   Optimizations affect the following instructions:
       branches      converts long branches to short if possible and deletes
                     branches to the following location
                       Aztec C Reference Manual



       movem          If there are no registers, deletes the instruction. If there is
                      only one register, substitutes the shorter move instruc-
                      tion. Note that the move instruction alters condition
                      codes, while movem does not.

       jsr            substitutes bsr, if possible.

       jmp             substitutes bra if possible.


SEARCHING FOR INCLUDE FILES
   By default the assembler searches only the current directory for files
   specified in include statements. It also searches a user-specified sequence
   of directories for such files, thus allowing program source files' and header
   files to be contained in different directories.
   Option -i and the INCLUDE environment variable define the directories
   the assembler searches for include files.
   The assembler automatically searches only the current directory for an
   include file if the following conditions are met:

             (1) the assembler is started without option -i

             (2) INCLUDE is not an environment variable, and

             (3) the include statement does not specify the drive and/or
             directory containing the file.

   If an include statement specifies either the drive or directory, only that
   location is searched for the file.

Option -i
   Option -i defines a single directory to be searched for a file specified in an
   include statement. The path descriptor follows -i with no intervening
   blanks. For example, the specification
       as -isys:db/include prog!
                                                   Assembler



   directs the assembler to search the sys: db/ include area when looking
   for an include file. If desired, more than one -i may be used, thus defining
   multiple directories to be searched.

INCLUDE Environment Variable
   The INCLUDE environment variable, if it exists, also defines directories to
   be searched for include files.
   The INCLUDE variable consists of the names of the directories to be
   searched, separated by semicolons. For example, the following command
   creates the INCLUDE environment variable, defining three directories to
   be searched:
      set INCLUDE=work:include;work:;sys:include

   These directories are (1) the include directory on the work: volume (2)
   the root directory on the work: volume, and (3) the include directory on
   the sys: volume.

Include Search Order
   When the assembler encounters an include statement, it searches direc-
   tories for the file specified in the statement in the following order:

          (1) current directory

          (2) directories specified in option -i in the order listed on the
          line that started the assembler

          (3) directories specified in the INCLUDE environment variable
          in the order listed

MODULE MEMORY MODEL
   Options -c and -d instruct the assembler to use the large code and large data
   models, respectively. For a discussion of these models, see the Compiler
   chapter of this manual.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



Assembler Options

SUMMARY OF OPTIONS
    -a                   Forces total size of code and data to be aligned to
                         a 4-byte boundary instead of the default 2-byte
                         boundary.

    -c                   Makes large code the default code memory
                         model. May be overridden by the near code
                         and/ or far code directives.

    -d                   Makes large data the default data memory model.
                         May be overridden by the near data and/ or far
                         data directives

    -enamel=val]         Creates an entry in the symbol table for name and
                         assigns it the constant value val. If val is not
                         specified, name is assigned the value 1.

    -iarea               Defines an area to be searched for files specified
                         in an include statement.

    -1                   Generates an assembly listing file.

    -m                   Metacomco compatibility option.

    -n                   Does not optimize object code.

    -0   filename        Specifies name of output object module.

    -v                   Verbose option. Generates memory usage statis-
                         tics.

    -ZAP                 Used primarily by the Aztec C compiler to direct
                         the assembler to delete the input file after process-
                         ing.
                                                      Assembler



DESCRIPTION OF OPTIONS

Option -c
   If you use this option, the assembled module uses the large code memory
   model.

Option -d
   If you use this option, the assembled module uses the large data memory
    model.

Option -0 filename
    If you use this option, the assembler sends the object code to filename. If
    option -0 is not specified, the assembler sends the object code to a file whose
    name is derived from that of the assembler source file (by changing the
    extension to .0). In this case, the file is placed in the directory containing the
    source file.

Option -I
    The -i option specifies where files referred to by the include directive are
    kept.
   If you use option -i, the assembler searches a specified area for files included
    in the source code.
   The name of the area should immediately follow the -i with no intervening
   spaces. For example, the following defines the directory source/ inc on
   volume sys: as an area to search for include files:
       -isys:source/inc

   For more details, see page 4-4.

Option -I
   If you specify option -I, the assembler generates a listing file. The name of
   the file to which the listing is sent is derived from that of the source file by
   changing the extension to .1st. The listing file is placed in the directory
   containing the source file.
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



Source Program Structure
  There are four types of Assembler statements:

         (1) Comments
         (2) Executable Instructions
         (3) Directives
         (4) Macro Calls

COMMENTS
  A comment can appear after a semicolon or after the operand field. For
  example:
         this is a comment
           1ink a6,#.2  ;this is a1so a comment

  A line used for a comment may alternatively begin with an asterisk.

EXECUTABLE INSTRUCTIONS
  Executable instructions have the general format:
     label operation operand

LABELS
  Assembler labels can be any length. External labels are only significant for
  the first 31 characters. Any additional characters are ignored. Valid label
  characters include letters, numbers, or the special characters" . "and" _". A
  label cannot begin with a digit unless it is a temporary label. Labels that do
  not start in the first column require a colon suffix. Note: C prefixes all
  external symbols with an underscore. For example, a C data object, int i,
  will appear as _i at the assembly level and should be referenced as such.

OPERATIONS
  The assembler recognizes all of the mnemonics found in Motorola's refer-
  ence manuals for the 68000,68020 processors and the 68881,68851 coproces-
  sors
                                                  Assembler


  To specify a length for instructions that support multiple lengths, suffix the
  instruction mnemonic with:
     .n     8-bit operands
     .W     16-bit operands
     .L     32-bit operands

OPERANDS
  The operand field consists of one expression, or two expressions separated
  by a comma with no embedded spaces. An expression comprises register
  mnemonics, symbols, constants, or arithmetic combinations of symbols or
  constants. In addition certain 68020 instructions require special operand
  syntax.
  Symbols or labels represent relocatable or absolute values. An absolute
  value is one whose value is known at assembly time. Arelocatable value is
  one whose value is not known until the program is actually loaded into
  memory for execution.
  Relocatable expressions can only be expressed arithmetically as sums or
  differences. The difference between two relocatable expressions is absolute.
  The result of summing two relocatable expressions is undefined.
  There are five types of constants: octal, binary, decimal, hexadecimal and
  string. An octal constant is expressed as an @ followed by a string of digits
  from the set 0 through 7 such as:
     @123     or    @777.

   A binary constant is expressed as a % followed by a string of ones and
  zeroes, such as
     %10101 or %11001100

  A decimal constant is a string of numbers. A hexadecimal constant is a $
  followed by a string of characters made up of numbers or letters from a
  through f such as
     $ffff or $la2e
                       Aztec C Reference Manual



   A string constant is any string of characters enclosed in single quotes such
   as
         , abdc'

   Register mnemonics include the data registers dO through d7; the address
   registers aO through a7; sp (same as a7) the stack pointer; pc the program
   counter (forces PC relative mode); sr the status register; ccr the condition
   code register; and the user stack pointer usp.
   The assembler supports addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (*),
   division U), shift right (», shift left «), unary minus, and (&), or (I). It also
   supports inclusive or (!), exclusive or (1\), bitwise not (-), and modulo U I).
   The order of precedence is innermost parenthesis, unary minus, shift,
   and/ or, multiplication/division, addition/ subtraction, bitwise, and logi-
   cals.


DIRECTIVES
   The following paragraphs describe the directives that are supported by the
   assembler.

blanks
         blanks     {on I off}
         blanks     {yes I no}
         blanks     {y I n}
    This directivecontrols whether the assembler accepts blanks or tabs in the
    operand field of the instruction.
    The default setting of off treats a blank as the end of the operand field.
    The blanks on setting allows blanks to be placed between any two complete
    items. With this setting all comments must be preceded by a ;.

clist and noclist
    These directives specify whether or not statements should be included in
    the listing file,when the statements were not assembled as a result of
                                                  Assembler



   assembler conditional statements. By default, such statements are not
   listed.

cnop
       label mop nl,n2
   This directive is used to force alignment on any boundary at a particular
   offset.
   The first value, nl, is an offset while the second value, n2, specifies the
   alignment to be used as the base of the offset. For example, to align to an
   even word boundary:
            cnop 0,2
   while to align to a long word boundary:
            mop 0,4
   and finally to align to a word beyond a long word boundary:
            cnop 2,4
   Note that this will only take effect relative to the beginning of the current
   module's code or data. Normally, the linker will not align individual
   modules to long word boundaries. So, for this directive to work, it must be
   the first module linked into the program, or the linker's -a option must be
   used.

cseg
   The assembly code following this directive is output into the code segment
   of the program output file.

dseg
   The assembly code following this directive is placed in the initialized data
   segment of the program file.
                      Aztec C Reference Manual



dc - Define Constant
       [laben     dc.b     value [,value, value •.•]
       [laben     dc       value[,value, value ••.]
       [laben     dc.w     value[,value, value ...]
       [laben     dc.l     valueLvalue ,value ... ]
       [laben     dc.b     "string'
   The dc directive causes one or more fields of memory to be allocated and
   initialized. Each value operand causes one field to be allocated and then to
   be initialized with the specified value. A value can be an expression. An
   expression may contain forward references.
   For command programs, a value can contain a reference to a memory
   location whose address will not be known until the program is loaded into
   memory. In this case, an item for this value will be added to the program's
   relocation table. When the program is loaded, the field containing this value
   will be set to the correct value.
    Each field for a particular dc directive is the same length. A period followed
    by b, w, or 1 can be appended to a directive, defining the field length to be
    one, two, or four bytes, respectively.
    If the field length is not specified in this way, it defaults to 2 bytes.
    Fields that are two or four bytes long are aligned on word boundaries.
    The last form listed for dc allocates a field having exactly the number of
    characters in the string, and places the string in it. Note: Trailing null
    characters must be explicitly requested, for example
       dc.b "Hello" I 0.

dcb - Define Constant Block
       [laben      dcb.b    sizeLvalue]
       [laben      deb      size[,value]
       [laben      dcb.w    size[,value]
       [laben      deb.l    size[,value]
    The dcb directive allocates a block of storage containing size fields, and
    initializes each field with value. If value is not specified, it is assumed to
    beD.
                                                        Assembler



      Each directive is the same length. A period followed by b , w, or I can be
      appended to a directive, defining the field length to be one, two, or four
      bytes, respectively. If the field length is not specified in this way, it defaults
      to 2 bytes(.w).
      Fields that are two or four bytes long are aligned on word boundaries.

ds • Define Storage
         [label]     ds.b     size
         [label]     ds       size
         [label]     ds.w     size
         [label]     ds.l     size
      This directive allocates a block of storage containing size fields, and sets
      each field to O.
      Each field for a particular ds directive is the same length. A period followed
      by b , W, or I can be appended to a directive, defining the field length to be
      one, two, or four bytes, respectively.
      If the field length is not specified in this way, it defaults to 2 bytes(.w).

entry
          [label]    entry    symbol
      This directive defines the entry point of the program. Only one entry can
      be declared per program. If no entry point is defined, the first instruction
      of the first module becomes the default entry point. The entry point must
      be in the first 32K of the root segment.

end
      This directive defines the end of the source statements.

equ
         label       equ      expression
      This directive assigns the value of the expression on the right to the label
      on the left.
                         Aztec C Reference Manual



equr
          [label]    equr     register
       This directive allows a register to be referenced by an alternate name.
       Reference to the new name is made without regard to case.

even
          [label} even

       This directive forces alignment to a word (16 bit) boundary.

fail
                     fail
       This directive causes the assembler to generate an error for this line. This
       can be used in macros which detect an incorrect number of arguments and
       wish to prevent assembly.

far code
       This directive causes the assembler to generate code for the large code
       memory model. Absolute addressing will be used with fixups being done
       by the startup code.

far data
       This directive causes the assembler to generate code for the large data
       memory model. Absolute addressing will be used with fixups being done
       by the startup code.

freg
          [label]    freg     register list
       This directive is like the reg directive, except that it is used to specify the
       floating point registers of the MC68881. The list is either composed of the
       floating point registers fpO through fp7 or of the floating point control
       registers fpcr, fpsr, and fpiar, but not both.
                                                     Assembler



ifc and Ifnc
       ife 'stringl',' string2'
       ifne 'stringl',' string2'
    These conditionals check to see if the two strings are equal. If they are, the
    ife will assemble the following code, while ifne will skip it.

ifd and ifnd
       ifd        symbol
       ifnd       symbol
    These conditionals check to see if the specified symbol has been defined or
    not. If the symbol has been defined, then ifd will assemble the following
    code, while ifnd will not.

If, else, and endc
       if      test

       [else]

       endc


   These directives are used to allow conditional assembly of parts of the input
   file. The general form of the if test is:
       exp
       exp == exp I I exp = exp
       exp!= exp I I exp <> exp
       'strl'== 'str2' II 'strl'='str2'
       'strl'!= 'str2' I I 'strl' 'str2'

   If the test result is true, then the lines up to an else or ende are assembled.
   If there is an else, then lines up to the endc are skipped. The skipped lines
   are not displayed in the listing file unless the clist directive has been used.
   If the test is false, then lines are skipped until an else or ende is encountered.
   If it is an else then the following lines up to an ende are assembled.
                     Aztec C Reference Manual



near code
    This directive causes the assembler to generate code for the small code
    memory model. It is the default unless the -c option, or far code directive,
    is used.

near data
    This directive causes the assembler to generate code for the small data
    memory model. It is the default unless the -d option, or far data directive,
    is used.

other Ifs
       ifeq absolute_expression
       ifgt absolute_expression
       ifge absolute_expression
       ifle absolute_expression
       iflt absolute_expression
       ifne absolute_expression
    These conditionals perform a comparison of the value of the absolute
    expression to zero. If the specified condition is true, then the following
    assembly language is processed, otherwise it is skipped.

include
       include 'filename'
       include "filename"
       include <filename>
    This directive causes the contents of the file specified to be processed by the
    assembler as if they had appeared at the same relative location as the
    include statement.

global and bss
       [label]    global symbol, size
       [label]    bss    symbol, size
    These directives reserve storage for uninitialized data items. The area is
    reserved in the uninitialized data area. If global is used then the data item
                                                  Assembler



    is known to other modules that are external to the routine. If bss is used
    then the data item is local to the routine in which it is defined.
    If a global is defined in more than one module, the linker will generate the
    error message:
         each external name must have exactly one definition ..
     A symbol that appears in both a global and a public directive is located
    in the initialized data area and the global statements size parameters are
    ignored.

list and no list
    The directives list and no list tum on and off, respectively, the listing of
    assembly language statements to the listing file.

mlist and nomllst
    The directives mUst and nomlist specify if the assembly language state-
    ments generated by a macro expansion should be written to the listing file.

machine
         machine mc68000
         machine mc68010
         machine mc68020
    This directive enables or disables the additional instructions and address-
    ing modes associated with different processors in the MC68000 family.

macro and endm
         macro     symbol

         text

         endm
    or
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



        symbol macro

        text

        endm
   symbol is entered in the assembler opcodes table. The text between the
   macro and endm is saved in memory. When symbol is encountered as an
   opcode the text is placed in line.
   Up to nine arguments can be specified in one of two ways. There is also an
   argument 0 which refers to the extension on the macro directive when it
   was invoked. The arguments are referenced in the macro text as either %0
   through %9 or \0 through \9. In expanding a macro symbolic argument
   references are replaced by their actual value.
   The assembler also has facilities for generating unique labels within a
   macro. When the \@ is specified within a macro, the assembler will
   generate labels of the form .nnn where nnn will have a unique value for
   each invocation of the macro.
   The symbol narg is a special assembler symbol that indicates the number
   of arguments specified when the macro is invoked. Outside of macro
   definitions, the value of narg is 0 .
   Macro arguments that contain a space or comma can be enclosed in brack-
   eting "<" and ">" characters.

mc68851
   This directive enables the mc68851 memory management instructions to be
   recognized and assembled by the assembler.

mc68881
   This directive enables the mc68881 floating point instructions to be recog-
   nized and assembled by the assembler.

mexit
   Upon encountering this directive, expansion of the current macro stops and
   the assembler scans for the statement following the endm directive.
                                                       Assembler


public
         [label]    public symbol[,symbo1..1
      This directive identifies the specified symbols as having external scope.
      These symbols are visible to the linker and are used to resolve references
      between modules. The type of the symbol is CODE if it appears within the
      code segment and DATA if it does not.

reg
         label      reg register list
      This directive assigns the value of the register list to the label. Forward
      references are not allowed. A register list consists of a list of register names
      separated by the I character. The - character may be used to identify an
      inclusive set of registers. This directive is generally used with the movem
      instruction.
      The following are valid register lists:
         aO-a3/dO-d21d4
         al/a2la4la6/aO-a2

section
         [label}     section name,CODE
         [label]     section name,DATA
      This directive performs the same functions as the cseg and dseg directives.
      The name parameter, if present, is ignored at the current time. The type
      parameter is used to switch from CODE and back again. If only a name
      parameter is specified, the type defaults to CODE.

set
         label       set     expression
      This directive assigns the value of the absolute expression to the symbol
      specified by label. This definition is similar to the equ directive, with the
      exception that this symbol's value can be changed with another set direc-
                       Aztec C Reference Manual



      tive. This includes expressions referencing the current value of the symbol
      itself. For example:
         sym          set      sym+l

      takes the current value of sym and adds 1 to it, which then becomes the new
      value of sym.

ttl
                    ttl title_string
      This directive sets the title of the current module being assembled. This
      directive is implemented for compatibility with other assemblers and has
      no effect at the current time.

xdef and xref
                    xdef    symbol
                    xref    symbol
      These directives are used to specify the definition and reference of global
      symbols.

MACRO CALLS
      Macro calls consist of a macro name with an optional label, extension, and
      arguments, in this form:
         [label]    macroname          [.ext]   [argl, arg2 ..•]

      The optional extension consists of a "." followed by any valid 680XO exten-
      sion, such as w, I, etc.
      Up to nine arguments may be passed to the macro.
      See the macro and endm section of this chapter for more information
      regarding macros.
                                                    Assembler



Interfacing With C
   Interfacing 68000 assembly language routines with C is relatively easy. The
   linkage conventions are straightforward and simple.


REGISTER CONVENTIONS
   It is the responsibility of an assembly language subroutine to preserve the
   values in registers a2 through as and a7, as well as registers d4 through d7.
   Register dO through d3 and aO, al and a6 are available as work registers.
   There is no need to preserve the values of work registers for other routines.


   Register dO contains the return value of the subroutine if the return type is
   non floating point. If the return value is floating point, then the return value
   is in the register pair dO-dl.


ARGUMENTS TO SUBROUTINES
   Upon entry register a7 (sp) points to the stack. The first item on the stack is
   a 32 bit absolute return address. The second item on the stack is the first
   argument to the subroutine, followed by the second, and so on. Arguments
   to C subroutines are passed by value. Therefore character, integer, long, and
   floating pOint arguments are copied onto the stack by value. If the functions
   are not prototyped,character items are promoted to type int before being
   pushed on the stack, otherwise character items are passed normally.

Variable Names
   The compiler attaches a leading underscore to all variable names. There-
   fore, in order to access these labels or names from within an assembly file,
   the programmer must prefix the labels with an underscore. The labels must
   also be declared as public or followed by a :# which makes them public.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



Returning from a C Function
   To return from a C function, it is necessary to do the following:

      • restore the values of registers d4 through d7 as well as registers
        a2 through as and a7 to the values they had at entry to the
        routine;

      • to place the return value, if any, in register dO or in dO + dl if
        floating point; and

      • to execute an rts instruction.

   It is not necessary to restore values to registers that were not changed.
   Upon return to the calling routine, the stack still contains the arguments
   that were passed to the subroutine. The first argument is on the top of the
   stack.
                      LINKER



Chapter 5 - Linker
  The Manx linker creates executable programs by linking together the pieces
  of the program that are compiled and assembled and are in relocatable
  object format.
  The linker has two functions:

     • It ties together the pieces of a program that were compiled and
       assembled separately

     • It converts the linked pieces to a format that can be loaded and
       executed.

  The Manx Assembler must first create the pieces.
  From those pieces, the linker can create several types of executable objects:

     • eLI Programs
     • Workbench Programs

     • Drivers, which other programs call to access devices
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



Introduction to Linking
  For those with limited exposure to linkers, this section introduces linking
  in general and the Manx linker in particular. If you are experienced or wish
  to skip this section, go right to "'Using the Linker".


LINKING Hello.o
  It is very unusual for a C program to consist of a single, self-contained
  module. Consider a simple program that prints
        hello, world
  using the function, printfO. The terminology here is precise: printfO is a
  function and not an intrinsic feature of the language. It is a function that
  you might have written but did not have to, because Aztec C already
  provides it in the file, c.lib. This file is a library of all the standard I/O
  functions. It also contains many support routines that are called in the code
  generated by the compiler. These routines aid in integer arithmetic, operat-
  ing system support, etc.
   When the linker sees that a call to printfO is made, it pulls the function from
   the library and combines it with the hello, world program. The link
   command looks like this:
        In hell0.o e.lib
   or
        In hell0.o -Ie

   When hello.c is compiled, calls are made to some invisible support func-
   tions in the library. So linking without the standard library causes some
   unfamiliar symbols to be undefined.
   Almost all programs need to be linked with some variant of c.lib.


THE LINKING PROCESS
  Since the standard library contains only a limited number of general
  purpose functions, all but the most trivial programs are certain to call
                                                        Linker



   user-defined functions. It is up to the linker to connect a function call with
   the definition of the function somewhere in the code.
   In the example given below, the linker finds two function calls in fil.el.
   The reference to funcl is "resolved" when the definition of funcl is found
   in the same file. However, the reference to func2 is unresolved because
   func2 is found in another file, e.g., file2 .0. Therefore, the following
   command
      l.n fil.el.o c.l.ib
   causes an error indicating that func2 is an undefined symbol. To be
   successful, the linkage must include fil.e2 .0 as follows:
       In fil.el.o file2.o c.l.ib
   Example

            File 1                           File 2

            main ()                          func2 ()
            {                                 {
                funcl () ;                   return;
                func2();


                funcl ()
            {
                return;




Libraries
   A library is a collection of object files put together by a librarian. Libraries
   intended for use with the linker must be built with the Manx librarian, lb.
   This utility is described in the Utilities chapter.
   The linker also recognizes AmigaDos libraries (Amiga.lib) See the discus-
   sion of these in the appropriate chapter of your Aztec C Library Manual.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



 All the object files specified to the linker are pulled into the linkage; they
 are automatically included in the final executable file. However, when a
 library is encountered, it is searched. Only those modules in the library that
 satisfy a previous function call are pulled in.
  The CUB environment variable, used to specify where libraries may be
  found, supports multiple entries when they are separated by an exclama-
  tion point (!). For example, if libraries are in both the sys2:lib and ram:
  directories, then CUB would be defined like this:
     set CLIB=sys2:lib!ram!

  The linker automatically adds an.O extension to files that have no extension.
  It checks all directories defined in the CUB environment variable and then
  the current directory .


EXAMPLE
  Consider the "hello, world" example. Having looked at the module,
  hello.o, the linker has built a list of undefined symbols.
  This list includes all the global symbols referenced but not defined. Global
  variables and all function names are considered to be global symbols.
  The list of undefineds for hello. 0 includes the symbol printfO. When the
  linker reaches the standard library, this is one of the symbols it will be
  looking for. It discovers that printfO is defined in a library module whose
  name also happens to be printfO. (There is no relation between the name
  of a library module and the functions defined within it.)
  The linker pulls in the printfO module in order to resolve the reference to
  the printfO function.
  Files are examined in the order in which they are specified on the command
  line. So the following linkages are equivalent:
     In hello.o
     In c.lib hello.o

  Since no symbols are undefined when the linker searches c.lib in the second
  line, no modules are pulled in. It is good practice to leave all libraries at the
  end of the command line, with the standard library last of all.
                                                       Linker



The Order of Library Modules
   For the same reason, the order of the modules within a library is significant.
   The linker searches a library once, from beginning to end. If a module is
   pulled in at any point, and that module introduces a new undefined
   symbol, then that symbol is added to the running list of undefineds. The
   linker does not search the library twice to resolve any references that remain
   unresolved. A common error lies in the following situation:
   Module of Program          References (function calls)

      main.o                    get input , do calc
      input.o                   gets
      calc.o                    put_value
      output.o                  printf
   Suppose we build a library to hold the last three modules of this program.
   Then our link step looks like this:
      In main.o proglib.lib c.lib
   But it is important that proglib . lib is built in the right order. Assume
   that main () calls two functions, getinput () and do_calc () . getin-
   put () is defined in the module input. o. It in turn calls the standard
   library function, gets (). do_calc () is in calc. 0 and calls
   put_value () . put_value () is in output. 0 and callsprintf ().
   The following paragraphs describe what happens at link time if proglib.lib
   is built in the order shown below:
      proglib.lib:         input. 0
                           output.O
                           calc.o


   After main. 0, the linker has get input and do_calc undefined (as well
   as some other obscure functions in c . lib). Then it begins the search of
   proglib .lib. It looks at the library module, input, first. Since that
    module defines getinp module defines get input , that symbol is taken
   off the list of undefineds. But gets is added to it.
                 Aztec C Reference Manual



The symbols do_calc and gets are undefined when the linker examines
the module output. Since neither of these symbols is defined there, that
module is ignored. In the next module, calc, the reference to do_calc is
resolved but put_value is a new undefined symbol.
The linker still has gets and put value undefined. It then moves on to
c.lib, where gets is resolved. But the call to put value is never satisfied.
The error from the linker looks like this:
   Undefined symbol: yut_value
This means that the module defining put_value is not pulled into the
linkage. The reason, as we saw, was that put_value was not an undefined
symbol when the output module was searched. This problem would not
occur with the library built this way:
   proglih.lih:         input. 0
                        calc.
                        ooutput.O


The ord command (described in the Utilities chapter) calculates a workable
order for a collection of .0 files.
Occasionally it becomes difficult or impossible to build a library so that all
references are resolved. In the example, the problem could be solved with
the following command:
   In main.o proglih.lib proglib.lib c.lih
The reason this is not the most satisfactory solution is that the linker must
search the library twice, thus lengthening linking time.
The most common cause of cycles is illustrated by the following example:
   f.c:                        g.c:
   int a;                      extern int a;
   f()                         gO
   {                           {
       g();                        a   = 4;
                                                     Linker



  Here, f () invokes q () so file g. 0 should follow f. 0 in the library.
  However, g () references a, so f . 0 must follow g. o.
  The solution to this problem is quite straightforward, however:
     f.c                          g.c:                         a.c:

     extern int a;                extern int a;                int a;
     fO                           gO
     { ... gO; ... }              { ... a = 4;


  By moving the definition of a to a separate file, the order f .0, g. 0, a. 0
  allows all references to be resolved.
  When there is no way to remove a cycle, the ord utility announces that fact
  and chooses a. 0 to break the cycle. The output of ord then contains
  duplicates.
  You can then try using the splitting technique above, or use the output from
  ord with Ib to construct a library with duplicates of some modules.


Using the Linker
  As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, the linker can create
  several types of executable programs. Much of the actual use of the linker
  is the same, regardless of the type of program generated.

STARTING THE LINKER
  Start the linker by entering:
     In     [-options]   filel file2 ...
  where [-options] are linker options and fUel file2 ... are the names of files
  containing object modules and libraries of object modules.
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



  For example, the most basic linker command which creates an executable
  "hello, world" program by linking object code in hello. 0 with modules
  in C .1ib is
     ln hell0.0 c.lib
  This creates a command program in the file hello.


INPUT FILES
  The linker scans the input files in the order in which they are specified on
  the command line. If a file contains a single object module, the module is
  automatically included in the program being built.
  H an input file is a library of object modules, the linker makes one pass
  through the library, looking for modules containing a function or global
  variable that has been called by an already-included module and that is not
  in any already-included module. When such a module is found, it is
  included in the program being built.
  In other words, when scanning a library of object modules, the linker only
  includes needed modules in the program it is building.
  A filename passed to the linker has the standard AmigaDos path format,
  i.e., it consists of an optional volume name, optional path to the directory
  containing the file, and the filename itself. The volume defaults to the
  current volume and the directory to the current directory.


EXECUTABLE FILES
  The name of the file to which the linker writes the executable program can
  be specified using linker option -0. If this option is not used, the linker
  derives the name of the executable file from that of the first object module
  listed on the command line, by deleting the extension. In the default case,
  the executable file is placed in the same directory in which the first object
  module is located.
  For example, the following instruction links main. 0, menu. 0, and
  add.o with the Manx library c . lib, all of which are in the current
                                                      Linker



  directory, and sends the executable program to the file named main in the
  current directory:
     In main.o menu.o add.o c.lib
  And the following links the same modules, placing the output in
  sys:bin/myprog
     In -0 sys:bin/myprog main.o menu.o add.o c.lib


LIBRARIES
  Aztec C provides the following basic libraries:

     c.lib
     m.lib

  All programs must be linked with c.lib. In addition to all the nonfloating
  point functions described in the library chapter, c.lib contains internal
  functions that are called by compiler-generated code, such as functions to
  process switch statements.
  m.lib contains the transcendental floating point functions described in the
  library chapter, such as sinO, and versions of the functions printfO,
  fprintfO, sprintfO, scanfO, fscanfO, and sscanfO. A program that calls any
  of these functions must be linked with m.lib in addition to c.lib.
  Otherwise, a program need not be linked with m.lib. In particular, if it
  performs floating point operations without calling any of these functions,
  it does not need to be linked with m.lib.
  When a program calls a printfO- or scanfO-type function to perform a
  floating point conversion, the linker must search m.lib before it searches
  c.lib. The reason for this is that there are two versions of these functions:
  the ones that support floating point are in m.lib; the others that do not are
  in c.lib. If c.lib is searched before m.lib, then when a program that requires
  the floating point versions is linked, the nonfloating point version of a
  function will be used and the program will misbehave.
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



  For additional information on the other libraries included with your Aztec
  C development package refer to the Library Overview chapter of the Aztec
  C Library Manual.



SUMMARY OF LINKER OPTIONS
  The linker options are summarized as follows:
  +a           Forces each module to be aligned on a long word
               boundary. For most applications this is not necessary
               and will only make the program larger. However, in
               certain cases (i.e. BCPL pointers) it is necessary for
               long word alignment.

  +c[cdb]      Forces loading into chip memory (Le. standard built-in
               memory) of the program sections whose identifying
               letters follow the +c.

  +f           Forces loading into fast memory (i.e. external add-on
               memory) of the program sections whose identifying
               letters follows the +f.

  -f file      Reads command arguments from file.

  -g           Tells the linker to generate a source level debugger out-
               put file. This file has the same root name as the pro-
               gram output file and the extension .dbg. This file is
               used by the optional Aztec C Source Level Debugger.

  +1           This option tells the linker that the following Amiga
               object modules are to be treated as though they are
               libraries until the next +1 is encountered. This option
               acts as a toggle and may be used several times in a
               single link line.

  -1 name      Library, e.g., -Ie for c.lib

  -m           Disables linker warnings about object module symbols
               overriding library symbols.
                                                        Linker



   -0 file       Specifies the name file to which the executable pro-
                 gram will be sent. If not given, the name of the file is
                 the same as that of the first input file, with the exten-
                 sion deleted.

   +o[iJ         Places the following object modules in code segment i.
                 If no number is specified, use the first empty segment.
                 If the segment already exists, the modules are added to
                 its end.

   -q            Turns off source level debugging file generation.
                 (See -g.)

   +q            Disable the module by module display while linking.
                 The linker displays the names of the various modules
                 as it reads them. This option causes the linker to sup-
                 press the display.

   +sss +ss+s val       Specifies four different models for scatter loading,
                        ranging from one big hunk to every module in its
                        own hunk.

   -t            Generates an ASCII symbol table file.

   -w            Generates a Wack-readable symbol table. This table is
                 also usable by db (see Chapter 7, DB Debugger.)

   -v            Specifies verbose link.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF OPTIONS

Option -I
    Option -1 provides a convenient way to link programs located in one
    directory with libraries located in another.
    Option -1 is immediately followed by the partial name of a library file. The
    linker builds the complete name by prefixing it with the string associated
    with the environment variable CUB and appending the string .lib to it.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



   For example, if the libraries are located in the directory sys : lib, then set
   CLIB to:
       sys:lib/
   and the object module prog. 0 could be linked with the libraries
   mylib. lib, m. lib, and e. lib using the command
       In prog.o -1mylib -1m -le



Option -f
   This option causes the linker to continue reading options filename from a
   file; when done, it then continues reading arguments from the command
   line. The name of the file follows option -f.
   For example, the following command links prog. 0 with sub1. 0,
   sub2.0, ... , m.lib and e .lib; it reads some filenames from the file
   prog.lnk:
       In -£ prog.lnk -1m -le
   where prog .lnk contains
       -0 prog.out
       sub1.0 sub2.0
       sub3.0
       sub4.0


    The contents of files read by the -f option should contain only the names
    of object modules and libraries to be linked. It should not contain any
    additional linker options.

Option +1
    This flag specifies that the following Amiga object modules are really
    Amiga libraries until the next option +1 is detected. The Linker automat-
    ically detects that a module is in Amiga format. However, because an
    Amiga object library is simply a concatenation of a number of modules, it
    is necessary to tell the Linker that the following module is a library.
                                                         Linker



   Otherwise, the Linker adds all the modules in the file to the program. For
   example, if modules aml .0 and am2 .0 are Amiga libraries, they can be
   linked in as follows along with the program prog . 0 :
      1n prog.o +1 aml.o am2.0 +1 -lc

Option -m
   Normally, when you create a variable in your program that has the same
   name as a library routine, the linker issues a warning that your symbol will
   override the library symbol. If the -m option is specified, the warnings are
   suppressed.

Option -0
   Option -0 can be used to specify the name of the file to which the linker is
   to write the executable program. The name of this file is in the parameter
   that follows the -0. For example, the following command writes the ex-
   ecutable program to the file progout:
      1n -0 progout prog.o c.1ib
   If this option is not used, the linker derives the name of the executable file
   from that of the first input file, by deleting its extension.

Option +0[11
   The linker uses this option to handle segmentation (overlay). The ex-
   ecutable code in the object modules that follow the option is placed in code
   segment i. If i is not specified, use the first empty segment number. If the
   segment already exists, append the code to its end. When segments are
   used, the linker generates a reference to the symbol .segload which is
   defined in a library module, segload.o. This module must be in the root
   segment for the program to function properly. The module is also available
   directly in the lib directory.
   Segments are loaded into memory as needed and remain in memory until
   explicitly removed by the program. The program does this by calling the
   freesegO routine with the address of a function that is in the segment to be
   unloaded.
                     Aztec C Reference Manual



Option +s, +SS, +SSS
   The Linker supports four models of scatter loading. Default model is no
   option and specifies code in one hunk. Linker option +s places each file in
   a separate hunk. This means that modules concatenated together into a
   single file and all modules pulled from a single library are placed together
   in the same hunk. Linker option +ss adds files to a hunk until the size of
   the hunk reaches 8K. The linker then starts a new hunk. Finally, Linker
   option +sss puts each module into its own individual hunk.
   The Linker generates a jmp instruction at the beginning of Hunk 0 if there
   has been an entry point defined and the entry point is not already at the
   beginning of Hunk O.

Option ·t
   The -t option creates an ASCII file that contains a symbol table for the linker.
   This file is just a text file which lists each symbol with a hexadecimal
   address. This address is either the entry point for a function or the location
   in memory of a data item. A perusal of this file will indicate which functions
   were actually included in the program.
    The symbol table file will have the same name as that of the file containing
    the executable program, with extension changed to .sym.
    There are several special symbols which will appear in the table. They are
    defined in the Program Organization section of the Technical Information
    chapter.

Option -w
    The -w option creates a disk file that contains a symbol table for the linker,
    in the format expected by Wack.

Option -v
    The -v option causes the linker to send a progress report of the linkage to
    the screen as each input file is processed. This is useful in tracking down
    undefined symbols and other errors which may occur while linking.
                                                      Linker



Options +c and +f
   There are two types of memory on an Amiga:' chip' memory, which is inside
   the Amiga; and 'fast' memory, which is external to the Amiga. By default,
   the three sections of a program (code, initialized data, and uninitialized
   data) are loaded into whatever memory is available. The +c and +f options
   allow you to force selected sections of a program to be loaded into chip and
   fast memory, respectively. Program sections are identified to an option by
   appending a letter to the option. These letters, and the sections to which
   they refer are:
      c             Executable code.

      d             Initialized data.

      b             Un initialized data (bss).

   If an option is used without appending any letters to it, then all the
   program's sections are forced to be loaded into the specified type of
   memory.
   For example:
      In +cdb +fc ....
   will force a program's initialized and uninitialized data to be loaded into
   chip memory and the program's executable code to be loaded into fast
   memory. Note that if there is no extra memory, the program will not load.
   More normally, you would use:
      In +cdb ....
   which will place the program's initialized and uninitialized data into chip
   memory and its executable code into whatever memory is available.
   Finally:
      In +c
   will force the program's initialized data, uninitialized data, and executable
   code to be loaded into chip memory; it is equivalent to +ccdb.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



Option -g
   The -g option is for use with the Manx Source Level Debugger (sdb). This
   option, combined with the compiler's -bs option, will generate a file with
   the .dbg suffix in the current directory. This .dbg file provides information
   necessary for use with sdb.
   For example:
   To compile and link the "hello, world" program and generate the .dbg file,
   you would use the following commands:
      cc -bs hel.l.o.c
      l.n -g hel.l.o.o -l.c
   This will create the file hello.dbg in the current directory.
   Using the -g option without having SDB installed will have no effect on the
   final program execution.
                    UTILITIES



Chapter 6 - Utilities
  This chapter describes the Aztec C utility programs, in alphabetical order.
                              Aztec C Reference Manual



NAME            arcv - text dearchiver


SYNOPSIS          arcv arcvfile [desC dir]

DESCRIPTION arcv is the counterpart to the utility mkarcv and is designed to
                extract files that were originally archived with mkarcv. arcv
                will take the archive arcvfile and extract all of the text files
                stored within it. The original archived file is left intact. The
                extracted files are placed in the directory specified by dest_dir;
                if desCdir is not specified, the files are placed in the current
                directory. If subdirectories have been included in the archive,
                arcv will create these and place the dearchived text files in
                them.


EXAMPLE         For example, if you have an archived file named ex-
                ample. arc which contains two files, explore. c and
                makefile, then the command:
                  arcv example.arc
                will place the files explore. c and makefile in the current
                directory.




       arcv
                                    Utilities



NAME          adump - Amiga object module dump utility


SYNOPSIS        adump [-cds] file

DESCRIPTION adump displays information about file, which contains an
              object module or load module that has been generated by the
              Amiga Assembler or Linker.
              adump always lists the length of each of the module's blocks
              and the offset of each block. The options to adump cause it to
              display the following additional information:


              Option         Meaning
                -c           Display code block contents in hex
                -d           Display data block contents in hex
                -s           Display symbol block contents (i.e., symbol
                             names). Symbol blocks are found in executable
                             files if debugging information has been in-
                             cluded.




                                                                  adump
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



NAME           cmp - file comparison utility


SYNOPSIS          cmp [-1] file1 file2

DESCRIPTION cmp compares two files on a character-by-character basis.
            When it finds a difference, it displays a message, giving the
               offset from the beginning of the file.
               If option -1 is not specified, the program will stop after the first
               difference, displaying a message in the format:
                  Files differ: character 10
               If option -1 is specified, cmp lists all differences, in the format:
                  decimal-offset hex-offset: f1-value f2-value
               where f1 and f2 are files.


EXAMPLES          ~ otst ntst

                  Files differ: character 10

               and
                  ~      -1 otst ntst
                  10      a:  00 45
                  100     64: 1a 23




       cmp
                                       Utilities



NAME            enm      - display object file info


SYNOPSIS          enm [-sol] file [file ... ]

DESCRIPTION enm displays the size and symbols of its object file arguments.
                The files can be object modules created by the Manx assembler
                or libraries of object modules created by the lb librarian. How-
                ever, enm does not support Amiga object module format.
                For example, the following displays the size and symbols for
                the object module sOO1 .0 and the library c .lib :
                  cnm sOO1.0 c.lib
                By default, the information is sent to the console. It can be
                redirected to a file or device in the normal way. For example,
                the following commands send information about sOO1 .0 to
                the display and to the file dispfile:
                  cnm sOO1.0
                  cnm > dispfile sOO1.0
                The first line listed by enm for an object module has the
                following format:
                  file (module): code: cc data: dd
                  udata: uu total: tt (Oxhh)
                where
                 • file is the name of the file containing the module
                 • module is the name of the module. If the module is unnamed,
                   this field and its surrounding parentheses are not printed
                 • cc is the number of bytes in the module code segment, in
                   decimal
                 • dd is the number of bytes in the modules' initialized data
                   segment, in decimal
                 • uu is the number of bytes in the module uninitialized data
                   segment, in decimal




                                                                        cnm
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



       • tt is the total number of bytes in the module's three seg-
        ments, in decimal
      • hh is the total number of bytes in the module's three seg-
        ments, in hexadecimal.

      OPTIONS
      Option List
        -s     Display size only
        -1     Display each symbol on a separate line
        -0     Prefix symbols with filename
      If cnm displays information about more than one module, it
      displays four totals just before it finishes, listing the sum of the
      sizes of the module code segments, initialized data segments,
      and uninitialized data segments, and the sum of the sizes of all
      segments of all modules. Each sum is in decimal; the total of
      all segments is also given in hexadecimal.
      Option -s tells cnm to display only the sizes of the object
      modules. If this option is not specified, cnm also displays
      information about each named symbol in the object modules.
      When cnm displays information about the module named
      symbols, option -1 tells cnm to display each symbol's informa-
      tion on a separate line and to display all of the characters in a
      symbol's name; if this option is not used, cnm displays the
      information about several symbols on a line and only displays
      the first eight characters of a symbol name.




cnm
                       Utilities



Option -0 tells cnm to prefix each line generated for an object
module with the name of the file containing the module and
the module name in parentheses (if the module is named). If
this option is not specified, this information is listed just once
for each module, prefixed to the first line generated for the
module.
Option -0 is useful when using enm in combination with
grep. For example, the following commands display all in-
formation about the module perror in the library c .lib:
  cnm -0 c.lib tmp
  grep perror tmp


Symbol Format
cnm displays information about a module's "named" symbols,
e.g., about the symbols that begin with something other than
a period followed by a digit. For example, the symbol quad is
named, so information about it would be displayed; the sym-
bol .0123 is unnamed, so information about it would not be
displayed.
For each named symbol in a module, cnm displays its name, a
two-character code specifying its type, and an associated
value. The value displayed depends on the type of the symbol.


Symbol Types
If the first character of a symbol type code is lowercase, the
symbol can only be accessed by the module; in other words,
the symbol is local to the module. If this character is uppercase,
the symbol is global to the module: Either the module has
defined the symbol and is allowing other modules to access it,
or the module needs to access the symbol that must be defined
as a global or public symbol in another module. The type codes
are:




                                                         cnm
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



      ab
      The symbol was defined using the assembler's equ directive.
      The value listed is the equated value of its symbol.
      The compiler does not generate symbols of this type.

      pg
      The symbol is in the code segment. The value is the offset of
      the symbol within the code segment.
      The compiler generates this type symbol for function names.
      Static functions are local to the function, and so have type pg;
      all other functions are global, that is, callable from other
      programs, and hence have type Pg.

      dt
      The symbol is in the initialized data segment. The value is the
      offset of the symbol from the start of the data segment.
      The compiler generates symbols of this type for initialized
      variables that are declared outside any function. Static vari-
      ables are local to the program and so have type dt; all other
      variables are global, i.e., accessible from other programs, and
      hence have type Dt.

      un
      The symbol is used but not defined within the program. The
      value has no meaning.
      In assembly language tenns, a type of Un (the U is capitalized)
      indicates that the symbol is the operand of a public directive
      and that it is perhaps referenced in the operand field of some
      statements, but that the program did not create the symbol in
      a statement label field.




cnm
                      Utilities



bs
The symbol is in the uninitalized data segment. The value is
the space reserved for the symbol.
The compiler generates bs symbols for static, uninitialized
variables that are declared outside all functions and that are
not dimensionless arrays.
The assembler generates bs symbols for symbols defined using
the bss assembler directive.

GI
The symbol is in the uninitialized data segment. The value is
the space reserved for the symbol.
The compiler generates GI symbols for nonstatic, uninitialized
variables that are declared outside all functions and that are
not dimensionless arrays.
The assembler generates GI symbols for variables declared
using the global directive that have a nonzero size.




                                                      cnm
                              Aztec C Reference Manual



NAME            du    - disk usage


SYNOPSIS          du directoryl [directory2 .. .J

DESCRIPTION The du command displays the disk usage information for the
            specified directory. The command automatically operates
            upon any subdirectories. The result is specified for each direc-
            tory in blocks. The blocks from a subdirectory are added to the
            parent directory's total.
                If no argument is specified, it defaults to the current directory.




       du
                                         Utilities



NAME            hd    - hex dump utility


SYNOPSIS          hd [+n[.]] fUel [+n[.]] file 2 ...

DESCRIPTION hd displays the contents of one or more files in hex and ASCII
            to its standard output.
                filel, file2, ... are the names of the files to be displayed.
                +n specifies the offset into the files where the display is to start
                and defaults to the beginning of the file. If +n is followed by a
                period, n is assumed to be a decimal number; otherwise, it is
                assumed to be hexadecimal. Each file will be displayed begin-
                ning at the last specified offset.


EXAMPLES       To display the data forks of the files oldtest and newtest,
               beginning at offset Ox16b and of the file named junk beginning
               at its first byte, you would use the command:
                  hd +16b oldtest newtest +0 junk
                To display the contents oftstfil, beginning at byte 1000, you
                would use the command:
                  hd +1000. tstfil




                                                                                hd
                                Aztec C Reference Manual



NAME            lb      - object file librarian


SYNOPSIS             lb library [options] [modl mod2 ... ]

DESCRIPTION lb is a program that creates and manipulates libraries of object
                modules. The modules must be created by the Manx assembler.


ARGUMENTS Library Argument
AND OPTIONS
                Ib acts upon a single library file. The first argument to Ib
                (library, in the synopsis) is the name of this file. The filename
                extension for library is optional; if not specified, it is assumed
                to be .lib.

                Options Argument
                There are function code options and qualifier options. These
                options are summarized and then described in detail.

                FUNCTION CODE OPTIONS
                Ib performs one function at a time on the specified library. The
                functions that Ib can perform, and the corresponding option
                codes, are:
                     Function                     Code

                     create a library             (no code)
                     add modules to a library     -a,-i, -b
                     list library modules         -t
                     move modules in a library    -m
                     replace modules              -r
                     delete modules               -d
                     extract modules              -x
                     ensure module uniqueness     -u
                     define module extension      -e
                     read function from file      -f
                     help                         -h


       Ib
                        Utilities



In the synopsis, the options argument is surrounded by square
brackets. This indicates that the argument is optional; if a code
is not specified, lb assumes that a library is to be created.

QUALIFIER OPTIONS
In addition to a function code, the options argument can
optionally specify a qualifier that modifies lb behavior as it is
performing the requested function. The qualifiers and their
codes are:

  verbose       -v
  silent        -s
The qualifier can be included in the same argument as the
function code, or as a separate argument. For example, to cause
lb to append modules to a library, and be silent when doing
so, any of the following option arguments could be specified:
  -as
  -sa
  -a -s
  -s -a


The mod Argument
The arguments modl, mod2, etc. are the names of the object
modules, or the files containing these modules, that lb is to use.
For some functions, lb requires an object module name, and
for others it requires the name of a file containing an object
module. In the latter case, the file's extension is optional; if not
specified, lb will assume that it is o. You can explicitly define
the default module extension using Option -e (see pages 6-22.)

Reading Arguments from Another File
lb has a special argument, -f filename, that causes it to read
command line arguments from the specified file. When done,
it continues reading arguments from the command line. Argu-
ments can be read from more than one file, but the file specified
                       Aztec C Reference Manual



         in a -f filename argument cannot itself contain a -f filename
         argument.

         Basic Features of Ib
         This section describes the basic features of lb. The basic points
         you need to know about lb are:
          • How to create a library
          • How to list the names of modules in a library
          • How modules get their names
          • Order of modules in a library
          • Getting lb arguments from a file.

         HOW TO CREATE A LIBRARY
         A library is created by starting lb with a command line that
         specifies the name of the library file to be created and the names
         of the files whose object modules are to be copied into the
         library. It does not contain a function code, and it is this absence
         of a function code that tells lb that it is to create a library.
         For example, the following command creates the library
         exmpl.lib, copying into it the object modules that are in the
         files obj 1.0 and obj2 .0:
            Ib exmpl.lib obj1.o obj2.o
         Making use of the Ib assumptions about filenames for which
         no extension is specified, the following command is equivalent
         to the above command:
            Ib exmpl obj1 obj2
         An object module file from which modules are read into a new
         library can itself be a library created by lb. In this case, all the
         modules in the input library are copied into the new library.
         When Ib creates a library or modifies an existing library, it first
         creates a new library with a temporary name. If the function
         was successfully performed, lb erases the file having the same
         name as the specified library, and then renames the new library,


r   Ib
                       Utilities



giving it the name of the specified library. Thus, Ib makes sure
it can create a library before erasing an existing one.
Note that there must be room on the disk for both the old
library and the new.

HOW TO LIST THE NAMES OF MODULES IN A LIBRARY
To list the names of the modules in a library, use the lb option
-to For example, the following command lists the modules that
are in exmpl . lib:
  lb exmpl . lib -t
The list includes some **DIR** entries. These identify blocks
within the library that contain control information. They are
created and deleted automatically as needed, and cannot be
changed by you.

HOW MODULES GET THEIR NAMES
When a module is copied into a library from a file containing
a single object module (that is, from an object module
generated by the Manx assembler), the name of the module
within the library is derived from the name of the input file by
deleting the input file's volume, path, and extension com-
ponents.
For example, in the example given above, the names of theob-
ject modules in exmpl.lib are objl and obj2.
An input file can itself be a library. In this case, a module's
name in the new library is the same as its name in the input
library.

ORDER OF MODULES IN A LIBRARY
The order of modules in a library is important, since the linker
makes only a single pass through a library when it is searching
for modules. For a discussion of this, see the Introduction to
Linking section of the Linker chapter.
When Ib creates a library, it places modules in the library in the
order in which it reads them. Thus, in the example given above,
the mod ules will be in the library in the following order:


                                                             Ib
                  Aztec C Reference Manual



       objl obj2
     As another example, suppose that the library oldlib. lib
     contains the following modules, in the order specified:
       subl sub2 sub3
     If the library newlib . lib is created with the command
       lb newlib modl oldlib.lib mod2 mod3
     the contents of the newly-created newlib .lib will be:
       modl     subl     sub2    sub3     mod2    mod3
     The ord utility program can be used to create a library whose
     modules are optimally sorted. For information, see the ord
     description later in this chapter.

     GETIING LB ARGUMENTS FROM A FILE
     For libraries containing many modules, it is frequently incon-
     venient, if not impossible, to enter all the arguments to lb on
     a single command line. In this case, the lb -£ filename feature
     can be of use: when lb finds this option, it opens the specified
     file and starts reading command arguments from it. After
     finishing the file, it continues to scan the command line.
     For example, suppose the file build contains the line
       exmpl objl obj2

     Then entering the command
       lb -£ build
     causes lb to get its arguments from the file build, which
     causes lb to create the library exmpl.lib containing objl
     and obj2.
     Arguments in a -f file can be separated by any sequence of
     whitespace characters ('whitespace' being blanks, tabs, and
     newlines). Thus, arguments in a -f file can be on separate lines,
     if desired.
     The lb command line can contain multiple -f arguments, al-
     lowing lb arguments to be read from several files. For example,



Ib
                       Utilities



if some of the object modules that are to be placed in
exmpl .lib are defined in arith. inc, input. inc, and
output. inc, then the following command could be used to
create exmpl.lib:
  lb exmpl -f arith.inc -f input.inc
     - f output.inc


A -f file can contain any valid Ib argument, except for another
-f. That is, -f files cannot be nested.

ADVANCEDlbFEATURES
In this section we describe the rest of the functions that Ib can
perform. These primarily involve manipulating selected
modules within a library.

ADDING MODULES TO A LIBRARY
lb allows you to add modules to an existing library. The
modules can be added before or after a specified module in the
library or can be added to the beginning or end of the library.
The options that select the add function are:
Option          Function

-b target       add modules before the module target
-i target       same as -b target
-a target       add modules after the module target
-b+             add modules to the beginning of the library
-i              same as-b+
-a+             add modules to the end of the library

In an lb command that selects the add function, the names of
the files containing modules to be added follows the add
option code (and the target module name, when appropriate).
A file can contain a single module or a library of modules.




                                                            Ib
                  Aztec C Reference Manual




     Modules are added in the order that they are specified. If a
     library is to be added, its modules are added in the order they
     occur in the input library.

     ADDING MODULES BEFORE AN EXISTING MODULE
     As an example of the addition of modules before a selected
     module, suppose that the library exmpl. lib contains the
     modules
       objl     obj2    obj3

     The command
       lb exmpl -i obj2 modl mod2
     adds the modules in the files modl .0 and mod2 .0 to
     exmpl.lib, placing them before the module obj2. The
     resultant exmpl .lib looks like this:
       objl     modl    mod2     obj2    obj3

     ADDING MODULES AT THE BEGINNING OR END OF A LIBRARY
     Options -b+ and -a+ tell Ib to add the modules whose names
     follow the option to the beginning or end of a library, respec-
     tively. Unlike options -i and -a, these options are not followed
     by the name of an existing module in the library.
     For example, given the library exmpl .lib containing
        objl    obj2
     the following command will add the modules modl and mod2
     to the beginning of exmpl . lib:
        lb exmpl -i+ modl mod2


     resulting in exmpl.lib containing
       modl mod2 objl obj2

     The following command will add the same modules to the end
     of the library:


Ib
                       Utilities



   Ib exmpl -a+ modl mod2
resulting in exmpl . lib containing
  objl       obj2   modl    mod2

MOVING MODULES IN A LIBRARY
Modules which already exist in a library can be easily moved
about, using the move option, -m.
As with the options for adding modules to an existing library,
there are several forms of move functions:
Option          Meaning
-mb target      move modules before the module target
-ma target      move modules after the module target
-mb+            move modules to the beginning of the library
-ma+            move modules to the end of the library
In the Ib command, the names of the modules to be moved
follow the move option code.
The modules are moved in the order in which they are found
in the original library, not in the order in which they are listed
in the lb command.

DELETING MODULES
Modules can be deleted from a library using option -d. The
command for deletion has the form
  lb libname -d modI mod2 ...
where modl, mod2, ... are the names of the modules to be
deleted.
For example, suppose that exmpl.lib contains
   objl obj2 obj3 obj4 obj5 obj6fP
The following command deletes obj3 and obj5 from this
library:
  Ib exmpl -d obj3 obj5


                                                             Ib
                  Aztec C Reference Manual




     REPLACING MODULES
     The replace option is used to replace one module in a library
     with one or more other modules.
     The replace option has the form -r target, where target is the
     name of the module being replaced. In a command that uses
     the replace option, the names of the files whose modules are to
     replace the target module follow the replace option and its
     associated target module. Such a file can contain a single
     module or a library of modules.
     Thus, an Ib command to replace a module has the form:
       lb library -r target mod1 mod2 ...
     For example, suppose that the library exmpl . lib looks like
     this:
       objl obj2 obj3 obj4
     Then to replace obj3 with the modules in thefilesmodl. 0 and
     mod2 . 0, the following command could be used:
        lb exmpl -r obj3 modl mod2
     resulting in exmpl . lib containing
       objl     obj2     modl    mod2       obj4

     UNIQUENESS
     lb allows libraries to be created containing duplicate modules,
     where one module is a duplicate of another if it has the same
     name.
     Option -u causes lb to delete duplicate modules in a library,
     resulting in a library in which each module name is unique. In
     particular, option -u causes Ib to scan through a library, looking
     at module names. Any modules found that are duplicates of
     previous modules are deleted.
     For example, suppose that the library exmpl.lib contains the
     following:
       objl     obj2     obj3    objl       obj3


Ib
                      Utilities




The command
   lb exmpl -u
will delete the second copies of the modules obj1 and obj2,
leaving the library looking like this:
  obj1     obj2    obj3

EXTRACTING MODULES
Extracting modules from a Library option -x extracts modules
from a library and puts them in separate files, without modify-
ing the library.
The names of the modules to be extracted follow the -x option.
If no modules are specified, all modules in the library are
extracted.
When a module is extracted, it is written to a new file; the file
has same name as the module and extension .0.
For example, given the library exmpl. lib containing the
modules
  obj1 obj2 obj3
the command
  lb exmpl -x
extracts all modules from the library, writingobj 1 to obj 1. 0,
obj2 to obj2. 0, and obj3 to obj3. o.
And the command
  lb exmpl -x obj2
extracts just obj2 from the library.

THE VERBOSE OPTION
The verbose option, -v, causes Ib to be verbose; that is, to tell
you what it is doing.




                                                            Ib
                  Aztec C Reference Manual



     SILENCE OPTION
     The silence option, -s, tells lb not to display its sign on mes-
     sage.This option is especially useful when redirecting the out-
     put of a list command to a disk file.

     REBUILDING A LIBRARY
     The following commands provide a convenient way to rebuild
     a library:
       1b exmp1 -st > tfi1
       1b exmp1 -f tfi1
     The first command writes the names of the modules in
     exmp1.1ib to the file tfi1. The second command then
     rebuilds the library, using as arguments the listing generated
     by the first command.
     The -s option to the first command prevents 1b from sending
     information to tfi1 that would foul up the second command.
     The names sent to tfil include entries for the directory blocks,
     **DIR**, but these are ignored by lb.

     DEFINING THE DEFAULT MODULE EXTENSION
     Specification of the extension of an object module file is option-
     al; Ib assures that the extension is .0. You can explicitly define
     the default extension using option -e. This option has the form
       -e.ext
     For example, the following command creates a library; the
     extension of the input object module files is . i.
       1b my.1ib -e .i mod1 mod2 m
     HELP
     Option -h will generate a summary of Ib functions and
     options.




Ib
                                             Utilities



NAME             Is        - list files and directories


SYNOPSIS              Is [-blprst] [file pattern I directory...]

DESCRIPTION Is lists the names of the files and the contents of the directories
            whose names are passed to it as arguments. The files you wish
            to list should be specified by one or more file-J1attern argu-
            ments. file-J1attern may be a filename with or without a path
            specification, or a filename mixed with wild card characters.
            The valid wild card characters are:
                 '?' - matches exactly one unknown or variable character.
                 ,*, - matches an arbitrary number of unknown characters.
                 Wildcards are used to list multiple file names that are related
                 in some way. For example,
                           1s *.c
                 will list all files with a .c extension.
                       1s ? bc.c
                 will list filenames such as abc. c, bbc. c, and 1bc . c, but
                 notaabc.c
                 If no names are specified, the contents of the current directory
                 are listed.
                 The information is written to the Is standard output device,
                 and thus goes, by default, to the screen. The information can
                 be sent to another device or file by redirecting the Is standard
                 output device in the normal manner.
                 By default, the output is sorted alphabetically in multiple
                 columns with directories displayed in an offsetting color.
                 When directed to a file, the output is always alphabetical, one
                 name to a line.
                 Options                  Meaning
                      -b      Displays the number of blocks in the file in addition
                              to any other information requested.



                                                                              Is
              Aztec C Reference Manual



     -1   Generates additional information for each file listed,
          including attributes, size, and last modification date
     -p   Forces a blank to be put before each filename and a -
          before each directory.
     -r   Reverses the order that has been specified.
     -s   Causes the list to be sorted by size, with the largest
          files first.
     -t   Causes the list to be sorted in chronological order
          with the most recent files first.




Is
                                       Utilities



NAME           mkarcv       - text file archiver


SYNOPSIS         mkarcv arcfile

DESCRIPTION mkarcv combines several individual text files into one "ar-
               chive" file, where the parameter arcfile is the name of the
               archive file. mkarcv reads the names of the files to be archived
               from its standard input device. Each filename is on a separate
               line.
               Usually, a separate file containing the names of the files to be
               archived is created first and mkarcv's standard input is
               redirected to this file in the standard manner. Alternatively,
               you can type in each file's name from the console, separating
               each name with a carriage return and ending the list with a
               period as the first character on a line by itself.
               Files archived with mkarcv may be dearchived with the arcv
               utility described elsewhere in this chapter. Please note that files
               archived with mkarcv are not in any way altered or "squeezed,"
               and the archive can be edited with a standard text editor.


EXAMPLE        To archive the files expl.ore . c and makefil.e into the file
               example. are, you would create a file named input. txt
               containing these two filenames with a carriage return after
               each name:
                 expl.ore.c <CR>
                 makefile <CR>
               and then redirect the standard input of mkarcv to this file:
                 mkarcv <input.txt            example.arc

               You can also interactively enter the filenames when you run
               the mkarcv command:
                 mkarcv example.arc <CR>
                 explore. c <CR>
                 makef ile <CR>
                 . <cr>

                                                                     mkarcv
                              Aztec C Reference Manual



NAME             obd - list object code


SYNOPSIS           obd objfile [,objfile, ...l

DESCRIPTION obd lists the loader items in an object file. objfile is the Aztec
                object module which you desire to examine.




       obd
                                         Utilities



NAME            ord - sort object module list


SYNOPSIS           ord [-v] [infile [outfile]]

DESCRIPTION ord sorts a list of object filenames for use by the Ib utility. A
                library that is generated from this sorted list will contain a
                limited number of backward references, i.e., global symbols
                that are defined in one module and referenced in a later
                module.
                Since the specification of a library to the linker causes it to
                search the library only once, a library having no backward
                references must be specified only once when linking a pro-
                gram, and a library having backward references may need to
                be specified multiple times.
                infile is the name of a file containing an unordered list of
                filenames. These files contain the object modules that are to be
                put into a library. If infile is not specified, this list is read from
                the ord standard input. The filenames can be separated by
                space, tab, or newline characters.
                outfile is the name of the file to which the sorted list is written.
                If it is not specified, the list is written to the ord standard
                output. outfile can only be specified if infile is also specified.
                Option -v causes ord to be verbose, sending messages to its
                standard error device as it proceeds.




                                                                              ord
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



NAME           set   - environment variable and exec file utility


SYNOPSIS          set
                  set VAR=string

DESCRIPTION set is used to examine and set environment variables.

               Displaying and Setting Environment Variables
               The first form listed for set causes it to display the name and
               value of each environment variable.
               The second form assigns string to the environment variable
               VAR.
               In the second form, if string is not given, the specified variable
               is deleted from the environment.


SEE ALSO       See the Tutorial chapter of your Aztec Shell User Guide for more
               information on environment variables.




       set
                                     Utilities



NAME            setdate - set date and time


SYNOPSIS          setdate

DESCRIPTION setdate allows you to set the date and time. It prompts you as
                follows:
                  Date(MM/DD/YY)?
                  Time(HH:MM:SS)?

                If you type 02/03, it leaves the year alone. If you type 12 in
                response to the Time prompt, it assumes 0 for the minutes and
                seconds.




                                                                  setdate
                    DEBUGGER



Chapter 7 - Debugger
   db is a symbolic debugger. It is used to debug programs which have been
   created using the Aztec C compiler, assembler, and linker.
   db has all the standard features of an assembly language debugger. It also
   has features not found in all debuggers, such as the ability to reference
   memory locations by name as well as by address, the ability to define
   sequences of commands to be macros, which can then be activated by
   entering a single letter, and a flexible mechanism for handling breakpoints.
   In addition, db has features specifically tailored to its use with Aztec C, such
   as the ability to list the name and parameters of the currently executing
   function, and the function that called it, and so on, back to the initial
   function. Another special feature is the ability to display, on entry and exit
   from each function, the function's parameters and return value. Finally, db
   supports both scatter-loaded and segmented programs.

Requirements
   An Amiga with at least 512k of memory is recommended for use with db.
   The debugger itself uses about 96k.

Preview
   This chapter is divided into three sections: Overview, which describes db
   features in more detail and introduces the commands; Using db, which
   describes in full detail how to use db; and a Command Summary.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



Overview
  db commands consist of one or two characters, the first of which identifies
  the command category. If there is only one command in the category, then
  the command has just one letter; otherwise, the command has a second
  letter which identifies the specific operation to be performed.

BASIC COMMANDS
  db has two types of commands for examining memory: display and print,
  whose first characters are d and p, respectively. The DISPLAY commands db
  and dw simply display hexadecimal bytes and words.
  The PRINT command, p, is more powerful, being able to convert a sequence
  of one or more possibly different types of data items to ASCII. For example,
  you can tell the print command that beginning at the location var is a
  sequence of the following items: an int, a float, and a pointer to a char string.
  The p command will convert the two binary items to ASCII and print them,
  then display the referenced character string.
  The REGISTER command, r, displays and modifies the 68000 registers.
  The MEMORY MODIFY commands, m, modify memory.
  The u commands UNASSEMBLE code; that is, they display it symbolically, in
  a form similar to its appearance in an assembly language source file.
  The 8,t and g commands cause your program to be executed. 8 and t
  commands SINGLE STEP your program; that is, they execute a specified
  number of instructions in your program and then return control to db. The
  t command differs from the 8 command by single stepping over jsr and bsr
  instructions. g commands transfer control of the processor unconditionally
  to your program. In this case, db regains control when your program
  terminates, when an error occurs (such as division by zero), or when a
  "breakpoint" is taken. Breakpoints are discussed later in this chapter.
  ? is the HELP command: It causes db to display a summary of all db
  commands. For some command categories, you can get information about
  the commands in a category by typing the first letter of the category's
  commands followed by a ? For example, typing m? gets you information
  about the memory modification commands (all of whose first letter is m).
                                            DB



NAMES
   db allows memory locations to be referenced by name as well as by location.
   It learns a program's global names by reading the symbols from the
   program file and placing them in a memory-resident symbol table. The
   linker generates a symbol table hunk for a program in response to the -w
   option.
   db only allows global symbols to be accessed by name; automatic variables
   and static variables cannot be accessed by name.
   You can also define names to db using the v command; The CLEAR SYMBOLS
   command, es, will remove symbols from the memory-resident symbol
   table.

Code and Data symbols.
   db classifies symbols as being either code or data symbols. All symbols in
   the program's symbol table hunks which occur between the special linker
   symbols _Hl_or~ and _Hl_end_ and between _H2_or~ and _H2_end_
   are considered to be data symbols, and all others are code symbols.
   There are two commands for viewing the symbols which are known to db:
   de and dd, which display code and data symbols, respectively.

Operator usage of names.
   When a e source program is compiled, all global names are prepended with
   an underscore character. To refer to symbols within db, the name can be
   typed without the underscore. First, the name will be searched for exactly
   as typed. If not found, db will prepend an underscore and search again.
   Note that this means to reference a symbol such as _main, you would have
   to type _main to differentiate it from the main symbol, since typing
   _main would match before the extra underscore is prepended.


LOADING PROGRAMS AND SYMBOLS
   The db program is started independently of the program to be debugged.
   The al command causes the debugger to wait till a program is loaded either
   from the Workbench or from the eu; the program is stopped before it
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



  executes any instructions. The debugger will also load the symbols from
  the program at this time if the program is in the current directory. If not in
  the current directory, the LOAD SYMBOLS command, Is, can be used.
  Unfortunately, the Amiga operating system contains no mechanism for
  terminating a program from an external process. So, there are two ways for
  the debugger to terminate the program. The first method is to simply allow
  the program to resume using the ar command and let it terminate normally.
  If the program is unlikely to terminate normally on its own, the ak com-
  mand checks the symbol table for the _abort symbol and then the exit
  symbol and sets the program counter to the first one found, allowing the
  program to resume.

BREAKPOINTS
  Before transferring control of the processor to your program in response to
  a g command, db can set BREAKPOINTS at specified locations in the code.
  When your program reaches a breakpoint, db regains control.
  A breakpoint has a SKIP COUNT associated with it, which allows a break-
  point to be passed several times before actually taking the breakpoint and
  returning control to db. When a breakpoint is reached, db is always
  activated; it increments a counter associated with the breakpoint. When the
  counter's value is greater than the breakpoint's skip count, the breakpoint
  is taken; that is, db retains control of the processor. Otherwise, db returns
  control of the processor to your program after the breakpoint. By default, a
  breakpoint's skip count is 0; thus, each time the breakpoint is reached, it is
  taken.
  A breakpoint can also have a sequence of db commands associated with it.
  When a breakpoint is taken, these commands will be executed before db
  allows you to enter commands. For example, if you just want to examine a
  variable each time a certain location in the code is reached and then have
  the program continue execution, you could define a breakpOint at the
  location, and specify a list of commands to do just that: the first command
  in the sequence would be a d command to display memory, and the second
  would be a g command to continue execution of the program.
  There are two ways to define breakpOints: with the g command, and with
  special breakpoint commands, whose first letter is b.
                                              DB



  The breakpoint commands manipulate a table of breakpoints: there are
  commands for entering breakpoints into the table, displaying the entries,
  resetting their counters, and removing them from the table.
  There is a difference between a breakpoint defined in a g command and
  those in the breakpoint table: The g command breakpoint is temporary,
  while a table breakpoint is more permanent (it exists until removed from
  the table). Before transferring control to your program in response to a g
  command, db sets all breakpoints that are in the breakpoint table and that
  are specified in the g command itself. When a breakpoint is taken, db
  removes all breakpoints from the code and forgets all about the g command
  breakpoint. The table breakpoints, however, are still in the table and will be
  set back in memory when control is again returned to your program.
  db remembers the skip counter associated with a breakpoint which is in the
  breakpoint table: When it sets breakpoints in memory, the count for such a
  breakpoint is set to its remembered value (that is, its value in the table); and
  when a breakpoint is taken, the accumulated count for the breakpoints in
  memory are saved in the breakpoint table.


MEMORY-CHANGE BREAKPOINTS
  The breakpoints described above are taken when a program reaches a
  specified point in the code. A second type of breakpoint, called a MEMORY-
  CHANGE BREAKPOINT, is taken when a specified memory location is
  changed from or set to a particular value.
  With a memory-change breakpoint set, db will detect either the function or
  the instruction which modifies the specified memory location, depending
  on whether your program was activated using a g command or is being
  single-stepped using an s or t command, respectively.
  When your program is activated with a g command and a memory-change
  breakpoint is set, db will examine the specified memory location on entry
  to, and exit from, each function. It will take a breakpoint, that is, interrupt
  execution of the program and return control to the operator, when the
  contents of the memory location meets the specified condition.
                   Aztec C Reference Manual


  When an s or t command is used to single-step a program and a memory-
  change breakpoint is set, db will examine the specified memory location
  after each instruction is executed, and take a breakpoint when appropriate.
  The b b ,bw, and bi commands are used to set and remove memory-change
  breakpoints.

TRACE MODE
  db supports a TRACE MODE, which displays information whenever a func-
  tion is entered or exited.
  When entering a function with trace mode enabled, the function or trap
  name and its arguments are displayed. Optionally, upon exit from a
  function, a return value is displayed.
  The commands bt and bT affect trace mode: bt enables and disables trace
  mode, and bT enables and disables the display of function exit information.

BACKTRACING
  When db regains control from an executing program (for example, because
  a breakpoint was taken), it has the ability to display information on how
  the program got to its current location. The ds command will display
  information about the currently executing function, and the function which
  called it, and so on, back to the Manx function _main, which called your
  function main.
  ds displays, for each function, its name, arguments which were passed to
  it, and the address to which it will return.


MACROS
  db allows you to define and execute MACROS, that is, a sequence of db
  commands.
  A macro is associated with a single alphabetical character, so up to 26
  macros can be known to db at any time.
  The db command x is used both to define and execute a macro.
                                             DB Debugger



OTHER FEATURES
  Some other features of db are:

     • The EVALUATE EXPRESSION command, =.

     • The HELP command, ?, which lists commands.

     • The INPUT RADIX command, n, which changes the default radix
       for input and display.


Using DB

STARTING DB
  db is started with a command of the form:
     db

  or by selecting the DB icon and clicking from the Workbench.
  When db starts, it creates a window with a startup message and then
  performs several actions. First, if running under V1.2 or later, the window
  is created without activating it. Next, db will look in the current directory
  for a file with the name .dbinit. If found, db will open the file, read it, and
  execute commands from the file.
  When db reaches the end of the file it checks to see whether it is waiting for
  a breakpoint or program load and if so skips the next step. If db is ready
  for a command, it will first look in the environment for a variable DBINIT.
  If found, db will open the file defined by this variable and read and execute
  commands from this file as well. In this way, it is possible to do system wide
  as well as local presets.
  When db has finished reading either or both files it again looks to see if it
  is waiting for a breakpoint or a program load. If it is not, then db will
  activate the window and wait for input for the next command. If it is, then
  db will not activate the window.
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



  For example, suppose you enter the following command,
     set DBINIT=s:dbinit

  then enter the following line in s : dbini t :
     al

  When you start db, it will open the window, read s : dbini t and wait for
  a program to load without activating the window. This means you can type:
     db
     program

  without having to use the mouse.

TERMINATION
  If a program is a process or eLI program, db will set a breakpoint on the
  return address from the program. If this breakpoint is reached, db will prin t
  a message that the program has terminated normally and will automat-
  ically resume the task.

SUPPORT FOR SCATTER-LOADED PROGRAMS
  This version of db contains support for scatter-loaded programs. Variables
  which are referenced using absolute addressing are displayed normally.
  Functions which are accessed through the jump table are displayed in
  parentheses. However, the names can be used as though not scatter-loaded.


SUPPORT FOR SEGMENTED PROGRAMS (OVERLAYS)
  db supports breakpOints in overlays. This is not easy, so there are some
  caveats. First, any reference to a function in another segment will force the
  segment into memory. For example, saying:
     u over!

  where over! is a function will force the segment into memory before
  disassembling.
                                              DB D



   If breakpoints are set in the permanent breakpoint table, then when the g
   command is given, any breakpoints in non-resident segments will force the
   segments into memory before setting the breakpoint. (Think of it as a
   reference to that symbol.) Note that if a segment is unloaded by the program
   the breakpoint is lost even if the segment is reloaded by the program.
   However, if a segment is unloaded and the debugger regains control, the
   next g command will reload the segment and reset the breakpoint.
   One potential problem to watch for: If you set a breakpoint, the program
   unloads the segment and the function gets called, but the breakpoint is no
   longer there.

I NPUT/OUTPUT
   While db is displaying information to the screen, the display can be stopped
   temporarily by typing "5. Any key will restart the display. Typing "C will
   abort the display.
   When db is waiting for a breakpoint or program to load, typing any
   character will cause db to stop the current program. When db is displaying
   while running the program (Trace mode, for example) it is best to use "C,
   as other characters may be swallowed by the display routines.

COMMANDS
   This section describes in detail the db commands. It first defines some terms
   that are used in the command descriptions.

Definitions

   EXPR
   An expr has the following form:
       tenn [binop tenn ...]
   That is, an expr can be a single tenn or a series of tenns separated by binary
   operators. The binary operators are:

        +     addition
              subtraction
        Of.
              multiplication
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



    I       division
     %      modulus
     &      bitwise and
        I   bitwise inclusive or
     1\     bitwise exclusive or

All operators have the same precedence, and an unparenthesized expr is
evaluated left to right. To override the default order of evaluation of an
expression, you can parenthesize the relevant parts of the expression.
An expr has a 32-bit value. The operators that are applied to the terms out
of which the expr is built affect just this 32-bit value.

TERM
A term always resolves to a numeric value, and can be one of the following:

     register     constant
     -term        addr
     *addr        #addr
                  (expr)
These names are defined in the following paragraphs.

   • REGISTERS are specified by their standard names; aO, dO, pc
     and so on. The value of the term is the contents of the register.

   • CONSTANT is a decimal, hexadecimal, octal number, or a char-
     acter.

     A sequence of digits preceded by Ox is taken to be a hexadecimal
     number and those preceded by Ob are binary numbers. A sequence
     of digits with a leading 00 is taken to be an octal value. Digit strings
     ending in . are taken to be decimal values. If none of these prefixes
     or suffixes are present, the radix of the value is taken from the cur-
     rent radix. The default radix is hexadecimal. Note that if the current
     radix is set to hexadecimal, numbers must start with a digit to distin-
     guish them from symbols (Le. fabc will be taken to be a symbol
     where O£abc will be taken to be a hexadecimal number.) However, if
     a symbol is not matched, and all the letters are hex digits, the sym-
                                        DB Dpn,"O"crp1"



 bol will be treated as a number. This is useful, but beware of some-
 thing like:

             dw foo+aO

 because aO will use the value in register aO and not the value OxaO.

 A character is represented by the character, surrounded by single
 quotes, as in 'x' The value of a character constant is its ASCII value.

 Certain characters, the single quote' and the backslash \ may also
 be defined within the single quotes. These are identified by a lead-
 ing backslash character, and are:

         char                   hex value        db notation
         newline                Oa               \n
         horizontal tab         09               \t
         backspace              08               \b
         carriage return        Od               \r
         form feed              Oc               \f
         backslash              5c               \\
         single quote            27              \'
         bit pattern             ddd             \ddd


• ADDR and II- ADDR When a term consists of a" followed by an
 addr, the value of the term is the contents of the 32-bit field
 referred to by the addr. For example:

 *var      The contents of the var field;
 *a3       The contents of the 32-bit field in the data
           segment pointed at by a3 ;
 *sp       The contents of the 32-bit field on the
           top of the stack;
 * (lbl+2) The contents of the 32-bit field
           referred to by Ibl+2;
             Aztec C Reference Manual



 Because an addr can itself be an expr, the *addr term may require
 extra parentheses. For example:

             *sp+2

 is equivalent to * (sp+2) and not (*sp) +2. The value of the first
 interpretation is the contents of the second word on the stack, while
 the value of the second is two plus the contents of the first word on
 the stack.

• PERIOD (.) The value of a tenn consisting of a period, ".", is the
  starting address addr of the last similar command. For example,
  if ten bytes of memory were displayed using the db command,
  as in:

             db Ox100,10

 then ..... would be set to Ox100 for the next db or dw command. If the
 next db or dw command is

             dw .

 the same 10 bytes would be displayed as words.

 "." has a separate value for the u command, for the db, dw, and m
 commands, and for the p command. An m command never
 modifies its associated ".".

• @ [function] symbol has as its value the return address of the
 specified function. The function name is optional, and defaults
 to the current function. The main use for @ is in the g command.
 For example:

             g @

 transfers control to your program, and sets a breakpoint at the
 return address of the current function.
                                           DB



As another example:
                 q @putc

transfers control to your program. When the function putc is reached, a
breakpoint will be set at the address to which it will return.


ADDR
An addr defines the address of a location in memory, and has the form:

     expr

Here are some examples of addr:
   pc
   main+l0
   .-40
   *sp+8
   data+* (a6+6)

RANGE
A range defines a block of memory. It has one of the following forms:

   addr,cnt
   addr>addr
   addr
   ,cnt

The form addr,cnt specifies the starting address, add r, and a number, cnt. cnt
is interpreted differently by different commands. For example, the DISAS·
SEMBLE CODE command, u, will display cnt lines, while the DISPLAY BYTES
command, db, will display cnt bytes.
The form addr>addr specifies the starting and ending addresses of range.
                      Aztec C Reference Manual



     A full range need not be explicitly specified, because db remembers the
     last-used range and will set unspecified range parameters from the remem-
     bered values:

        • When a range is specified which consists of a single addr, the last
          used ent is used.

        • When a range is specified which consists of ,ent, the next consecu-
          tive address is used, and the remembered ent is changed to the
          new value.

        • When nothing is specified as the range, the next consecutive ad-
          dress is used as the starting addr, and the ent is set to the remem-
          bered value.

     CMDLlST
     A cmdlist is a list of commands. It consists of a sequence of commands or
     macros separated by semicolons:
        COMMAND     [; COMMAND . . . ]

     If a macro is in a cmdlist, it must be the last command in the list.


COMMAND DESCRIPTIONS
     The following descriptions of debugger commands use terms and concepts
     which were presented in the preceding sections.
     The commands are listed alphabetically. For an index, see the command
     summary which follows the descriptions.

The Amlga Commands

>-   add              display device list
>-   adi              display interrupt list
>-   adl              display library list
>-   adp              display port list
>-   adr              display resource list
                                               DB



Syntax:
        add
        adi
        adl
        adp
        adr

Description:
   These commands play the addresses and names of one of the various lists
   pointed to by ExecBase in the Amiga.


>- ai               display task information
Syntax:
        ai

Description:
   This command displays information about a particular task. If the task is a
   process or has been run from the CLI, additional information besides the
   task information is displayed.
   If a task has already been selected, the ai command displays the information
   for the selected task. Otherwise, a list of tasks is displayed and the debugger
   prompts for you to enter a task.




>- ak               kill the current task
Syntax:
        ak
                      Aztec C Reference Manual



Description:
    This command is used to terminate the program or task currently being
    debugged. It does this by transferring control to the _abortO or exitO
    function of the program.
    The Amiga operating system has no provisions for tracking memory or
    resource allocation. As a result, it is not possible to "kill" an executing task
    from an external one. Thus, jf the program being debugged is unable to
    resume and exit normally, the system must be rebooted.
    The only alternative is to force the program into its exitO function. This may
    or may not work depending upon the state of the program when the ak
    command is given. At the least, some memory is likely to be lost.
    This command is made available as a shortcut for the equivalent command
    r pc=e:x:i t, and discretion in its use is ad vised.


~  al                debug the next program or task
~  aL                debug the next task without symbols
Syntax:
       al
       aL

Description:
    Since the debugger operates as an independent task, it cannot load
    programs directly. Instead, it replaces certain vectors in the system and
    waits for the next program or task to be loaded. The debugger takes control
    before the task or program begins to execute.
    Thus, to debug a program, this command is given and the debugger waits
    while you switch to a new window and either type a eLI command or click
    on a Workbench icon to start the program.
    After the program is loaded and the debugger gains control, the symbols
    are loaded from the program file unless the aL command is used. Under
    1.2, the window is automatically activated when the program is loaded.
                                             DB



~   an              create a new debugging window
~   aN              create a new debugging window with new symbols
Syntax:
         an
         aN

Description:
    When the debugger is started, it creates its own window for commands and
    displays. With the an command it is possible to create additional windows
    for debugging more than one task at a time. If the an command is used, the
    new window will share symbols with the window active when the com-
    mand was given. This is useful when debugging a sub-task that is a part of
    the active program. Note that the al command will not read symbols if a
    symbol table already exists.
    When the aN command is used, the new window is created with an
    independent symbol table. This is useful for debugging several programs
    simul taneously.



~   am              memory information
Syntax:
         am

Description:
    This command displays the amount of free memory in the system.



~   ap              debug a crashed program (post-mortem)
~   aP              debug a crashed program without symbols
Syntax:
         ap
         aP
                     Aztec C Reference Manual



Description:
   When a program run from the eLI or Workbench crashes because of an
   address or bus error or a divide by zero, etc.,the trap is handled by a special
   DOS handler that puts up the "Software Failure" requester. Selecting
   RETRY has no effect, and selecting CANCEL passes control to exec's trap
   handler which displays the guru. This function provides a way to examine
   the environment after the crash.
   If db is running, or if you can start up db from another window, then using
   the ap command, db can act as though it was in control the whole time.
   When you give the command, db will ask you to select the task to be
   debugged. It will also make an informed guess as to which task it is. After
   selecting the task, db will instruct you to select the CANCEL button in the
   requester.
   db will have control right at the point of error. At this point, it is possible
   to examine the state of things to determine why it happened and possibly
   to even recover by patching or skipping the code in error. Note that this is
   not always possible, since memory may have been corrupted before the
   error occurred.
   Note also that if multiple requesters are present for different tasks, this will
   only work if you choose the most recent task that failed and click the proper
   requester.


>- aq               close all windows
Syntax:
        aq

Description:
   When more than one window is created using the an command, individual
   windows can be closed using the q command. The aq command will close
   all the windows and terminate the debugger. When the last window is
   closed, the debugger terminates.
   When a window is closed, if a task was stopped for debugging, the task is
   allowed to resume.
                                              DB Debugger



    The aq command perfonns a q command for each of the windows that is
    open.


~   ar              allow the current task to resume
Syntax:
         ar

Description:
    When a task has been selected for debugging, it is kept in a stopped state
    while commands are being given. The ar command deselects the task and
    allows db to resume. The window returns to the state it was in before a task
    was selected.


~   as               select a task to debug
~   as               select a task without symbols
Syntax:
         as
         as

Description:
    It is possible for the debugger to debug a task or program that is already
    running in the system. The as command displays a list of all tasks in the
    system and prompts for the number of the task to debug. That task is
    stopped and the symbols for that task are loaded from the program file
    unless the as fonn of the command is used.


~   at               display all tasks
Syntax:
         at
                      Aztec C Reference Manual



Description:
    The at command displays a list of all tasks in the system along with their
    priority, the address of the task block, the status and the name.


The Breakpoint Commands

~   bb               set byte memory-change breakpoint
~   bw               set word memory-change breakpoint
~   bi               set long memory-change breakpoint
Syntax:
       bb
       bw
       bi
       bb      addr [== [val] ]
       bb      addr [!= [val] ]
       bw      addr [== [val] ]
       bw      addr [!= [val] ]
       bi      addr [== [vall]
       bi      addr [!= [val] ]

Description:
    These commands are used to set and clear a memory-change breakpoint,
    with the parameterized versions used to set breakpoints and the parameter-
    less versions to clear them. The b b command is used to monitor a one-byte
    field, the bw command to monitor a two-byte (word) field and the bi
    command to monitor a four-byte field.
    In the parameterized form of the commands, addr specifies the field to be
    monitored.
    With the == form, the breakpoint will be triggered when the debugger
    detects that the field is equal to the specified value, val.
    With the!= form, the breakpoint will be triggered when the debugger
    detects that the field is different from the specified value.
                                                 DB Debugger



   The val parameter is optional. If not specified, db defaults to the current
   value at the addr. If the comparison field is also not specified, the default is
   !=. Thus, to break when a location is changed, use the command:
        bwaddr



>- be                clear a single breakpoint
>- be                clear all breakpoints
Syntax:
        be addr
        bC

Descriptio n:
    These commands delete breakpoints from the breakpoint table.
    be deletes the single breakpoint specified by the address addr, and bC
    deletes all breakpoints from the table.


>- bd                display breakpoints
Syntax:
        bd

Description:
   bd displays all entries in the breakpoint table.
    For each breakpoint, the following infonnation is displayed:

        • Its address, using a symbolic name, if possible.

        • The number of times reached without breakpointing.

        • The skip count;

        • The command list, if any.
                         Aztec C Reference Manual



    For example, a bd display might be:

          address    hits     skip       command
          Jrintf     1           2
          Jute       0           o       db    Cbuffs


    In this example, two breakpoints are in the table. The first is at the beginning
    of the function Jrintf; a breakpoint will be taken for it every third time
    it is reached, and no command will be executed. Given its current hit count,
    a breakpoint will be taken the second time J r i n t f is reached.
    The second breakpoint is at the function Jute; a breakpoint will be taken
    each time the function is reached, and will display memory, in bytes,
    starting at _ Cbuffs.


~   bh                   set memory hash breakpoint
Syntax:
         bh    [range]

Description:
    bh performs a simple checksum on the specified range of memory. Break-
    points are automatically set at the entry and exit of all functions. The
    checksum is checked each time the debugger regains control of the task. If
    the checksum is ever detected to be different, the debugger will stop the
    program at that point.


~   bq                   toggle low memory checksum
Syntax:
         bq

Description:
    When the debugger starts, it checksums the first 256 bytes of memory. Each
    time the debugger regains control, this checksum is calculated. If the
                                                DB Debugger



   checksum differs from the saved value, a message is displayed and the
   program stopped. The new checksum is saved so multiple breakpoints are
   not generated.
   The bq command toggles whether the checksum is done or not. Turning
   off checksumming will speed single-stepping since otherwise the check-
   sum is computed for each instruction executed.


>- br                   reset breakpoint counters
Syntax:
        br     [addr1

Description:
   br resets the "hit" counter for the specified breakpoint which is at the
   address, addr. If addr is not given, the "hit" counters for all breakpoints in
   the breakpoint table are reset.


>- bs                   set or modify a breakpoint
Syntax:
        [#1 bs addr [icmdlist1

Description:
   bs enters a breakpoint into the breakpoint table, or modifies an existing
   entry.
   The optional parameter # is the skip count for the breakpoint. If not
   specified, the skip count is set to 0, meaning that each time the breakpoint
   is reached it will be taken.
   The optional parameter cmdlist is a list of debugger commands to be
   executed when the breakpoint is taken.
                     Aztec C Reference Manual



> bt                toggle the trace mode flag
> bT                toggle the return trace mode flag
Syntax:
       bt
       bT

Description:
   bt and bT toggle the trace mode and return trace mode flags, respectively.
   The state of the trace mode flag determines whether trace mode is enabled
   or disabled.
   The state of the return trace mode flag determines whether the tracing of a
   function's return is enabled or disabled. If trace mode is disa bled, the return
   trace mode flag has no effect.
   Note that recursive calls will not handle the return trace mode correctly.


> bu                user defined breakpoint
Syntax:
       bu addr

Description:
   bu sets the address of a user-defined breakpoint function.
   This command sets a pointer to a function which is called each time the
   debugger regains control. The function has no effect when it returns a zero
   value. When a non-zero value is returned, a message displaying the value
   is displayed and the task stopped.
   The function is called as a C function and is expected to follow the standard
   C register saving conventions. Passed as an argument to the function is the
   address of an array of longs which contain the tasks register values, includ-
                                              DB   Dphll1O"(tPr




    ing the program counter and status register. The order of items in the array
    is:

          registers dO-d7
          registers aO-a7
          status register
          program counter


    This function can be used to breakpoint on special conditions. For example,
    the program can be stopped when the dO and d1 registers contain the same
    value. The function would look like this:
                   moveq        #O,dO
                   move.l       4(sp),aO
                   move. 1      (aO) , d1
                   crap         4(aO),d1
                   bne          1$
                   moveq        #l,dO
              1$   rts
    Setting the address to zero disables the breakpoint.



The Clear Commands

~   cs               clear symbol table


Syntax:
         cs

Description:
    cs removes all symbols from the debugger's memory-resident symbol
    table.
                     Aztec C Reference Manual


The Display Commands

>- db                display memory in bytes
>- dw                display memory in words
>- dl                display memory as longs
>- d                 display memory in last format
Syntax:
        db [range]
        dw [range]
        dl [range]
        d [range]

Description:
   The db, dw and dl commands display successive bytes, words and double
   words of memory, respectively. d displays memory using the last format
   specified; for example, if d is entered, and db was the last DISPLAY MEMORY
   command, then d will display bytes, too.
   The starting address of the range parameter is optional; if not specified, it
   defaults to the ending address of the last display's range, plus one.
   Each line of the display begins with the address, followed by a hexadecimal
   display of 16 bytes, 8 words or 4 double words, followed by an ASCII
   display, by bytes, of the same data. For the ASCII display, values falling
   outside the range 0x20 to Ox7f are displayed as a period.
   If the ending address does not fall on a multiple of 16 bytes, only the number
   of bytes or words specified in the last line will be displayed.



>- de                display all code symbols
Syntax:
        dc
                                              DB Debugger



Description:
   de lists all the code symbols in the memory-resident symbol table and all
   user-defined symbols.
   For each symbol, name and address are displayed.


>- dd              display all data symbols
Syntax:
        dd

Description:
   dd lists all the data symbols in the memory-resident symbol table.
   For each symbol, name and address are displayed.



>- dg              display global values
Syntax:
        dg

Description:
   For each data symbol in the debugger's symbol table, dg displays the
   contents of the 16-bit field referenced by that symbol.


>- ds              display stack back trace
Syntax:
        ds

Description:
   ds displays information about the current function, the function which
   called it, and so on, back to _mainO, the Manx function which called your
   function mainO.
                      Aztec C Reference Manual



    For each function, the information consists of the function's name, the
    parameters passed to it, and the address to which it will return. The
    arguments are displayed as a series of 16-bit hex values. If an argument is
    actually of type long or double, it will be displayed as separate words.
    ds determines the number of parameters by looking at the instructions
    which follow the address to which the function will return. ds assumes
    that the as register points to the C stack frame for the current function,
    unless the current instruction is within 4 bytes of the start of the function.

The Go commands

~   g                 execute the program
~   G                 execute the program, without setting table breakpoints
Syntax:
        [#]g [@ function] [addr] [;cmdlist]
        [#]G [@ function] [addr] [jcmdlist]

Description:
    The g commands transfer control of the processor to your program, at the
    address specified by pc. Your program then executes until it terminates, an
    error such as division by zero occurs, or a breakpoint is taken; control then
    returns to the debugger program.
    The parameters to the g commands allow one or two temporary break-
    points to be set in memory before your program is executed.
    The difference between the g and the G command is that the G command
    sets in memory just the breakpoints specified in the command itself, while
    the g command also sets the breakpoints specified in the breakpoint table.
    The # and addr parameters define one of the temporary breakpoints that a
    Go command can set:

        • # is the skip count for the breakpoint; it defaults to zero, mean-
          ing that the breakpoint is taken every time it is reached.

        • addr is the address for the breakpoint;
                                               DB



   The @ function parameter specifies that a temporary breakpoint is to be set
   at the return address of the specified function. If the function is not
   specified, it defaults to the current function. If a function is specified, the
   breakpoint is set to the address to which the function will return. In this
   case, the breakpoint is not set until the function is entered; thus, in programs
   which call the function from several different places, the breakpoint will be
   set at the actual address to which the function will return.
   The ; cmdlist parameter defines a sequence of debugger commands,
   separated by semicolons, that the debugger is to execute once a breakpoint
   which is specified in the go command is taken. If this parameter is not
   specified, it defaults to the command list used for the last temporary
   breakpoint.
   Before setting breakpoints and transferring control to your program, the
   debugger single-steps your program, (that is, causes it to execute one
   instruction). This allows you to transfer control to a location in the program
   at which there is a breakpoint, without immediately triggering a breakpoint
   and re-entry to the debugger.

The Load Commands

>- Is                  load symbols
Syntax:
         Is progfile

Description:
   Is loads symbols from the specified program file into the debugger's
   memory-resident symbol table, after first clearing the memory-resident
   table of all but those symbols defined with the v command.

The Memory Modification Commands

>- rna                 allocate some memory
Syntax:
         maval
                     Aztec C Reference Manual



Description:
   rna allocates val bytes of memory and displays the address of the memory.
   This command is mostly used to allocate memory for patches and possibly
   to hand assemble a small user break routine. The         associated with
                                                          /1./1


   memory change and display is set to the address as well making it possible
   to load patches or user functions from a file.


>- mb               modify bytes of memory
>- mw               modify words of memory
>- ml               modify double words of memory
Syntax:
        mb addr expr1[expr2 .. J
        mw addr exprl [expr2 ...]
        ml addr exprl [expr2 ...]

Description:
   mb, mw and ml modify bytes and words of memory, respectively.
   The parameter addr specifies the address of the first byte or word to be
   modified.
   The expr parameters are expressions, whose resulting values are set in
   memory, with exprl set in the first byte or word specified, expr2 set in the
   next higher byte or word, and so on.
   The expr parameters can be separated by spaces or commas.


>- mc               compare memory
Syntax:
        mc     range =addr
                                              DB Debugger



Description:
    me compares two blocks of memory and, for each comparison which fails,
    displays the corresponding address and value.
    range specifies one of the blocks of memory. The second begins at addr and
    has the same length as the first block.


~   mf               fill memory
Syntax:
         mf    range = expr

Description:
    mf sets each byte in a block of memory to a specified value.
    The range parameter specifies the memory block, and expr an expression
    whose resulting value is the value to be set in the range.


~   mm               move memory
Syntax:
         mm range =addr

Description:
    mm copies one block of memory to another.
    The range parameter specifies the source block and addr the starting address
    of the block to be modified.


~   ms                search memory
Syntax:
         ms    range =exprl [expr2 ...]
                      Aztec C Reference Manual



Description:
    ms searches a block of memory for a sequence of bytes having specified
    values. For each match, the corresponding address of the start of the string
    is displayed.
    range specifies the block of memory. The expr parameters are expressions,
    each of whose resulting values is one byte of the search sequence.

The Radix Command

~   n                change radix
Syntax:
        nx
        n

Description:
    This command changes the default radix (hexadecimal) for user input or
    debugger display. The suffix x is a single character b, d, 0, or x which
    changes the default radix to binary, decimal, octal, or hexadecimal respec-
    tively. If suffix x is omitted, a message giving the current radix is displayed.
    The radix can be forced to a given value by specifying one of the following
    prefixes before the desired number:

          Ox         hex
          00         octal
          Ob         binary

    To display a number in decimal, the number must have a . (period) ap-
    pended to it.

The "Print" Command

                      fonnatted print
Syntax:
        p[format] [addr]Lcount]
                                                DB Debugger



Description:
   p displays a formatted section of memory. Data items are converted to a
   displayable form as directed by the format conversion string fonnat.
   fonnat is a list of format specifications, each of which defines the type of a
   data item and the conversion to be performed on it.
   p works its way through the fonnat string, converting and displaying data
   in memory as requested by the format string items. When p reaches an item
   in the fonnat string, it converts the data at its current address as directed by
   the format item. When it finishes processing a format string item: it incre-
   ments its current address by the size of the data item that it just processed,
   and processes the next data item as directed by the next format string item.
   The fonnat string is optional; if not specified, the fonnat string used by the
   previous p command is used.
   addr specifies the address of the first data item that p is to convert and
   display. If addr is not entered, the starting address is assumed to be the print
   command's current address. Normally, this is the address of the first byte
   beyond the last data item converted by the last p command. However, there
   is a fonnat item that causes p to remember the address contained in the
   current data item, and then make that the current address after it finishes
   processing the entire format string.
   count specifies the number of times that p is to work its way through the
   format string. Each time through, p begins at the current address that was
   left by the last time through. If count is not specified, it defaults to one time.
   The format items have the form:
       [rpt][indirJlgs][size1desc_code
   where

       • descJode is a single-letter code that defines the type of the data
        item and the conversion to be performed upon it. For example,
        the code d converts the two-byte binary value at the current ad-
        dress to decimal, and prints it. So if var is an int, the following
        would print its value in decimal:

                     pd var
             Aztec C Reference Manual



 The code x says "take the two-byte binary value at the current ad-
 dress, convert it to hexadecimal, and print the result". So the
 hexadecimal value of var could be printed with the command:

             px var

• indirJIgs is a string of zero or more * characters, which are in-
  direction indicators specifying that the value at the current data
  item is a pointer to a chain of zero or more pointers, the last of
  which points to an object whose type and requested conversion
  are defined by descJode.

 To find the data object corresponding to a format item that has in-
 direction indicators, p begins by setting its idea of the address of the
 data object to the current address. It then works its way from left to
 right through the indirection indicators; for each indicator it
 replaces its current idea of the data object address with the pointer
 that is in the field at this address. The data object address is distinct
 from the current address. At the end of this process, the p
 command's current address is simply incremented past the first
 pointer.

 A * specifies that the pointer within the field referenced by the cur-
 rent data object address is four bytes long. This pointer is the offset
 component of the new data object address from the last segment ref-
 erenced.

 For example, if the variable cp is a pointer to a character string (that
 is, its declaration is char *cp), then the string pointed at by cp
 could be printed by the command

             p*s cp

 Here we have made use of the s desc_code, which specifies that the
 data object is a character string, and that the string's characters are
 to be printed, with possible modifications as noted below, up to a
 terminating null character. Mter this command, the p command's
 current address is set to the byte immediately following cp .
                                        DB D



 As another example, if cpp is a pointer to an array of pointers to
 character strings (that is, the declaration of cpp is char **cpp),
 then the string pointed at by the first element of the array could be
 displayed with the command

             p**s cpp

 Following this command, the p command's current address is set to
 the byte following cpp.

• The rpt parameter of a format item defines the number of times
  that the item is to be processed. It allows a sequence of rpt identi-
  cal format items to be abbreviated by just one such item with a
  leading rpt count.

 For example, if a is an array of floats, then the first five items in
 this array could be displayed with the command

             pSf a

 This command uses the fact that the desc_code to convert a four-byte
 floating point value at the current address to a displayable value is
 f. This command is equivalent to the command pfffff a. At the
 end of this command, the p command's current address is set to the
 address of the byte following the last displayed float.

• The size parameter of a format item defines the number of data
  items that are to be converted and printed. When the format
  item does not use indirection, size has the same effect as rpt; for
  example, in the pSf a command above, the 5 could be inter-
  preted as being a size parameter instead of a rpt parameter.

 When the format item uses indirection, the size parameter defines
 the number of data items to be converted and printed at the end of
 the indirection chain. For example, if a module defines lpp as a
 pointer to an array of pointers to an array of longs (the declaration
 of 1 pp is long * * ip), then the following command will display the
 first four longs pointed at by the first element ofthe pointer array:

             p**4D lpp
             Aztec C Reference Manual



Here we have used the D desc_code, which specifies that a four-byte
signed binary value is to be converted to decimal and printed. The
following command would display the first three longs pointed at
by the first three elements of the pointer array:

             p3*4D *lpp

To demonstrate further the difference between the rpt and size fields
in a format item, consider the format items 4 *d and * 4d. The first
causes the print command to take the item at the current address as
a pointer, increment the current address by four, convert to decimal
and print the two-byte value referenced by the pointer, and then
repeat the process three more times. At the end of the process, the
current address has been advanced by sixteen.

The second item causes the print command to again take the item at
the current address as a pointer, increment the current address by
four, and then convert to decimal and print the four successive two-
byte values that begin at the address defined by the pointer. At the
end of the process, the current address has been advanced by four.

As an examplee of the use of format strings containing several for-
mat items, consider the following code in a program that uses short
data pointers:

             struct
                   int *ip;
                   float fIt;
                   char *cp;
             } var    =
                      {&i, 3.14159, "ralph"};
             int i=2;

The command

             p*d2-xf*s2-x var

will print

     2xxxx 3.14159 ralph yyyy
                                          DB Debugger



     where xxxx is the hexadecimal address of i and yyyy is the
     hexadecimal address of the string.



A complete list of desc_codes
     b Convert to hexadecimal and print a byte.
     d Convert to hexadecimal and print a 2-byte signed binary value.
     D Convert to decimal and print a 4-byte signed binary value.
     f Convert and print a four-byte float.
     F Convert and print an eight-byte double.
     o Convert an octal and print atwo-byte field.
     a Convert to octal and print a four-byte field.
     x Convert to hexadecimal and print a two-byte field.
     X Convertto hexadecimal and print a four-byte field.
     u Convert to decimal and print an unsigned, two-byte value.
     U Convert to decimal and print an unsigned four-byte value.
     p Print a pointer in address form with translation.
     P Print a pointer in address form without translation.
     c Print a character with translation
     C Print a character without translation.
     s Print a string up to a terminating null byte with translation.
     S Print a string up to a tenninating null byte without translation.

For the C and S desccodes each character is printed as is , with no transla-
tions.
For the c and s codes, printable ASCII characters (that is, whose hex value
is between Ox20 and Ox7D are printed as is. A character whose hex value is
less than 0x20 is printed as two characters: 1\ followed by the printable
character whose hex value equals the original character's value plus Ox40.A
character whose hex value is Ox80 or greater is displayed as a' character
followed by the one or two characters that would be printed for the
character whose hex value equals that of the original character less Ox80.
For example,Ox41, Oxl, and Ox81 would be printed as A, "A, and' "A,
respectively.
                 Aztec C Reference Manual



The following desc_codes can be used to assist in the formatting of the p
output:

    character                    output
    Norn                         Output a newline character
    Rorr                         Output a blank character
    Tort                         Output a tab character
    "string"                     Output "string"

These characters can be preceded by a count specifying number of charac-
ters or strings to be output.
The next group of desc_codes change the p command's notion of the
current address. They do not cause any printing.
     A          Back up the current address by the size of the last data item.

     -or +      Back up or advance, respectively, the current address by size
                bytes, where size is a decimal value preceding the code. If
                size is not specified, it defaults to one byte.

     Aora       Remember the pointer that is contained in the current data
                object: If this pointer is not null, set the p command's
                current address to this value after the entire format string
                has been processed.

If the pointer is null, set the p command's current address to the value it
had before the entire format string was processed.
The A and a desc_codes are useful for printing the elements of a linked list.
For example, consider the following code, which defines the structure for
a symbol table item and declares sym._head to be a pointer to this structure.
The program that uses this structure and field will chain symbol table items
together and set a pointer to the head of the chain in sym._head.
   struct symbol {
   struct symbol * sym._next;
   char *sym._name;
   unsigned sym_val;
   } *sym._head;
                                               DB



    The following command would display the symbol table item pointed at
    by sym_head and then set the p command's current address to the next
    symbol table item, which is pointed at by the sym_next field in the first
    item:
        pA"symbol name="*snt"value="x sym_head

    After this command is entered, you can display successive symbol table
    items by simply entering:
        p

    The p command's current address is correctly set to the next table item, and
    since a format string is not specified, the p command will use the one that
    it last used.
    You can print out multiple symbol table items by entering a single p
    command. To do this, place a comma and the maximum number of items
    to be printed after the command's starting address. The command will
    follow the chain, printing symbol table items until it either prints the
    specified number of items or it prints an item whose sym_next pointer is
    null. In the latter case, it will terminate and leave the p command's current
    address set to the address of the last symbol table item. For example,
    entering:
        pA"symbol name="*snt"value="x symyead,lOO

    will print symbol table items until it either prints 100 items or it prints an
    item having a null sym_next pointer.

The Quit command

~   q                quit the debugger
Syntax:
        q
                     Aztec C Reference Manual



Description:
   When more than one window is created using the an command, individual
   windows can be closed using the q command. When the last window is
   closed, the debugger terminates.
   When a window is closed, if a task was stopped for debugging, the task is
   allowed to resume.

The Register command

>- r                 register display
Syntax:
       r

Description:
    r displays and modifies the registers, including the status registers, of the
    program being debugged.
    The parameter-less version displays the registers. If a 68881 is in use for this
    task, its registers are displayed as well, though they may not be modified.
    The parameterized version modifies the contents of a register, with <reg>
    being the name of the register to be modified, and expr an expression whose
    resulting value is to be set into the register.

The Single Step commands

>- s                 single step with display
>- S                 single step without display
>- t                 single step with display over subroutines
>- T                 single step without display over subroutines
Syntax:
       [#] s [;cmdlist]
       [#] S [;cmdlist]
       [#] t [;cmdlist]
       [#] T [;cmdlist]
                                              DB Dph1'10"0"'"''



Description:
    These commands SINGLE STEP your program; that is, they execute its
    instructions one by one. The s versions of the command single-step through
    each and every instruction. The t versions allow you to treat jsr and bsr
    instructions specially. The debugger does not gain control until the routine
    called by the instruction returns.
    The optional # parameter specifies the number of instructions to be ex-
    ecuted; it defaults to one instruction. However, a value of 0 specifies a
    continuous mode which will only stop by user intervention or when one
    of the other breakpoints is encountered.
    The optional cmdlist parameter is a list of debugger commands to be
    executed after each single-step.
    The commands differ in that sand t display information after each single-
    step, whereas Sand T only display information after the last single-step.
    The displayed information consists of the registers and a disassembly of
    the next instruction to be executed.

The Unassemble commands

~   u                unassemble memory, with symbols
~   U                unassemble memory, without symbols
Syntax:
        u range
        Urange

Description:
    These commands DISASSEMBLE a range of memory; that is, they display the
    assembly language instructions in the range.
    The u and U commands differ in that the u command will make use of the
    symbol table during disassembly and the U command will not. Also, the U
    command displays, for each instruction, the hex value of each byte of the
    instruction, whereas the u command will not.
                       Aztec C Reference Manual



    With the u command, the disassembly of an instruction which references
    memory displays the location as the symbol nearest to the location plus an
    offset, if possible. With the U command, the location is displayed as a
    hexadecimal value.
    The range parameter specifies the area of memory to be disassembled. It
    gives the starting address, and either the number of instructions to be
    disassembled, or the ending address of the area.

The Variable commands

~   v                  create a new symbol
~   V                  modify the value of an existing symbol
Syntax:
        v      symbol = addr
        V       symbol = addr

Description:
    The v and V commands are used to create a new symbol or modify the value
    for an existing symbol, respectively, in the debugger's memory resident
    symbol table.
    symbol is the name of the symbol being created or modified, and addr is its
    address.
    The symbol will be classified as a code symbol.

The Macro command

~   x                  macro command
Syntax:
        xc
        xc = cmdlist
        x?
                                               DB



Description:
     The x command defines or executes a sequence of debugger commands,
     called a MACRO. It can also list the defined macros.
     A macro is associated with any letter, so up to 26 macros can be defined.
     Case is insignificant. A macro is defined by typing the letter x, followed by
     the letter with which the macro is to be associated. Then follows an =
     character and the macro's list of debugger commands, with the commands
     separated by semicolons. To execute a macro, type x, followed by the letter
     with which the macro is associated, followed by a carriage return.
     Macros can be listed with the command x? The output format is suitable
     for reading back in from a file.

The Display Expression Command

>-   =                display the value of an expression
Syntax:
         =expr

Description:
     This command displays the value of an expression.
     The expression is displayed in several formats: hexadecimal, signed
     decimal, unsigned decimal, octal, binary, and ASCII. If a symbol table has
     been loaded, the closest symbol is displayed as well.

The Redirect Input/Output Commands

>- <                  take input from file
>- >                  log output to file
>- »                  log commands only
Syntax:
         <file
         >file
         »file
                     Aztec C Reference Manual



Description:
   These commands are used to temporarily redirect input and output to the
   files specified.
   The < command causes the input which normally comes from the keyboard
   to be taken from the named file instead. This continues until the end of file
   is reached. This is especially useful for defining macros.
   The> command causes the output of all commands to be displayed in the
   window and also written to the file specified. This continues until either a
   different file is specified using the> command or until the> command is
   used with no file name. In this case, the current file is closed and redirection
   stops.
   The» command causes a log of the commands only to be saved in a file.
   This is useful if a complicated set of commands is needed to get a program
   to a certain point for debugging. After the commands have been logged to
   the file, the file can be used as input via the < command to retrace the steps
   to reach the same point.

The Help command

>- ?                list commands
Syntax:
       [letter]?

Description:

   This command lists the debugger commands. For groups of related com-
   mands, the listing usually lists the first letter of the commands followed by
   a ? You can get a listing of all the commands in such a group by typing the
   letter, the?, and return. For example, the listing for the display commands
   is d?; thus you can type d?, followed by return to get a listing of all the
   display commands.
                                  DB



Command Summary
AMIGA COMMANDS
    add          display device list
    adi          display interrupt list
    adl          display library list
    adp          display port list
    adr          display resource list
    ai           display task information
    ak           kill the current task
    al/aL        wait for next task load with/without symbols
    am           display memory information
    an           make a new debug window
    ap/aP        select task for post-mortem
    aq           close all windows
    ar           release curren t task
    as/aS        select task to stop with/without symbols
    at           display task list

BREAKPOINT COMMANDS
    bblbwlbl     set byte/word/long memory-change
                 breakpoint
    bclbC        clear one/ all breakpoints
    bd           display the breakpoint table
    bh           set checksum breakpoint
    bq           toggle low memory checksum
    br           reset the breakpoint counters
    bs           set or modify a breakpoint
    btlbT        enable/ disable trace mode
    bu           set user defined breakpoint
                  Aztec C Reference Manual



CLEAR COMMANDS
     cs                clear all symbols

DISPLAY COMMANDS
     db/dw/dl/d        display memory in
                       bytes/words/longs/last format
     dddd              display code/ data symbols
     dg                display global values
     ds                display stack backtrace

GO COMMANDS
     giG               execute user's program

LOAD COMMANDS
     Is                load symbol

MEMORY MODIFICATION COMMANDS
     rna               allocate some memory
     mb/mw/ml          modify bytes/words/longs of memory
     mc                compare areas of memory
     mf                fill memory
     mm                move memory
     ms                search memory

RADIX COMMAND
     n                 change the default radix for input and display

FORMATTED PRINT COMMANDS

     P                 generate formatted print

QUIT COMMAND
     q                 close current window
                                   DB Debugger



REGISTER COMMAND
     r          register display

~NGLESTEPCOMMANDS

     siS        single step with/without display
     tff        single step with/without display
                over calls

UNASSEMBLY COMMANDS
     u/u        assemble memory

VARIABLE COMMAND
     vN         create/modify symbol

MACRO COMMAND
     x          define or modify a command macro

DISPLAY EXPRESSION
                display value of an expression

INPUT/OUTPUT COMMANDS
     <          take input from file
     >          log output to file
     »          log commands to file

HELP COMMAND
     ?          list debugger commands
   TECHNICAL INFORMATION



Chapter 8 • Technical Information
   This chapter discusses technical topics and topics that could not be con-
   veniently discussed elsewhere.
   It is divided into the following sections:

        1. Program Organization. Discusses the factors tha t affect the memory
        organization of a program.

        2. Segmentation and Segmented Code. Describes the partitioning of
        a program's executable code into several segments.

        3. Object Module Libraries. Discusses the object module libraries
        provided with Aztec C.

        4. Assembly Language Functions. Describes how to interface assemb-
        ly language routines with C routines.

        5. Interrupt Handlers. Describes routines to provide real-time
        response to events.

        6. Creating Subtasks. Discusses programmer use of multi-tasking
        supported by Amiga.

        7. Floating Point Information.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



       8. Building Programs that Run from the Workbench. Describes how
       to build programs that run from the Workbench.

       9. Creating Detachable Programs.

  Note: In this chapter, the number zero is represented by the character "0",
  in order to better distinguish between it and the letter "0".


Program Organization
  Programs created with the Aztec C system are automatically split into
  several different sections by the compiler and linker. These sections are
  called segments. Code is split into these distinct segments so that the Amiga
  can most efficiently utilize its memory, because segments need not be
  contiguous, or next to each other, within the Amiga's memory space. The
  following segments are used for a program:

     • one or more code segments
     • an initialized data segment
     • an uninitialized data segment
     • a stack segment
     • zero or more heap segments

  The code segment(s) contain all of the program's executable code. You can
  specify how many code segments there will be, (up to 256) and what
  routines will be contained within each one. See below for more details.
  The initialized data segment contains all of the program's initialized data.
  Initialized data is data which is initialized at the time of its declaration. For
  example, the following code fragment:
     int i = 5;
     main ()
                             Technical Information



  declares i as an initialized data object. Note that only global variables and
  static variables which are initialized count as initialized data; normal local
  variables are always placed on the stack. Initialized data is set to a value at
  compile time, and thus takes up space in the executable file.
  The uninitialized data segment is used for all uninitialized global and static
  variables. In the following code fragment, i is uninitialized data because it
  is given its initial value from within a function, and not where it is declared:
     int i;
     main ()
     {
           i   = 5;
      }



  Initialized data does not take up space in the executable file, but it must be
  initialized at runtime from within a function before it is used.
  The stack segment is used for local (also known as automatic) variables, as
  well as for function call address information.
  The heap segment(s) are used by the standard memory allocation routines
  (mallocO, callocO, etc.), and indirectly by the standard I/O routines, to
  allocate memory at runtime. These segments do not take up any space
  within the program file.

PLACEMENT OF SEGMENTS OF MEMORY
  The locations of the code, initialized and unitialized data segments, and
  stack are set by the Amiga loader. The placement in memory of any
  particular program segment is independent of the placement of any other
  segments, with one exception: If any of the program's modules use the
  small data memory model, the program's initialized and uninitialized data
  segments occupy a single, contiguous block of memory, with the uninitial-
  ized data following the initialized data.
  Linker options +c and +f can be used to force a program's code, initialized
  data, and/or uninitiaIized data segments to be loaded into chip or fast
  memory. For details, see the Linker chapter. A common application for this
                   Aztec C Reference Manual


  is to force all initialized data into chip memory, so that the Amiga custom
  graphics chips can access this data.

SEGMENT SIZE
  Due to various factors, certain segments may have size restrictions placed
  upon them. The exact restrictions depend on the segment type:

     • Code segments: There is no limit on the size of a program's code
       segments, regardless of whether the small code or large code
       memory models are used.

     • Initialized and uninitialized data segments: If all of a program's
       modules use the large data memory model, there is no limit to
       the sizes of its initialized and uninitialized data segments. If any
       of its modules uses the small data memory model, then register
       a4 points 32K from the beginning of the program's data area,
       and data that small data modules attempt to access must lie
       within 32k bytes on either side of the location pointed at by a4.
       Because of this limitation, it is strongly recommended that you
       do not mix small and large data model files, unless you carefully
       plan how your files will be linked.

      • Stack segment: When a program is loaded within the eLI en-
        vironment, the size of its stack area is set to the value specified in
        the most recently-entered stack command, or to the CLI default
        value if a stack command has not been entered. When a program
        is loaded by the Workbench, the program's .info files define the
        size of its stack area.

      • Heap segment(s): The size of a program's heap segments
        depends on its use of the dynamic allocation routines and stand-
        ard I/O routines. If none of these routines are used, it is possible
        to effectively have no heap segment. For a discussion of the size
        of dynamically-allocated buffers which are placed in the heap
        segments, see the Library Overview chapter in your Aztec C
        Library Manual.
                             Technical Information



Segmentation and Segmented Code
   The following two sections describe how the executable code portion of a
   program can be split into multiple segments to allow a large program to
   run within a limited amount of memory. The section entitled SEGMENTA-
   TION discusses how segmentation works, and the SEGMENTED CODE
   section describes how to create segmented code.


SEGMENTATION
   Code segmentation is very similar to overlay systems which are available
   on other computer systems. The primary difference between the Amiga's
   segmentation scheme and other overlay techniques is that your source code
   does not need to be modified to take advantage of it. All segmentation setup
   is done at link time.
   When segmentation is used, a program should be designed so that all major
   functions are mutually exclusive of each other. Thus, it is not necessary for
   each function to be available at all times. Instead, the control section of the
   program, called the root, loads each function only when needed. The root
   remains in memory at all times.
   When a program is segmented, functions may exist within different seg-
   ments. When the program is executed, only the root segment is initially
   loaded into memory. Then, when the root calls a function that is not located
   within a segment that has already been loaded, the segment that contains
   the function is automatically loaded into memory from disk. The segment
   remains in memory until the root segment explicitly removes it.
   In reality, any reference from one segment to another segment causes the
   specified segment to be loaded, if it was not previously loaded in. Therefore,
   no restriction is imposed upon the structure of the program. In fact, one
   way to understand segmentation is to think of it simply as delayed program
   loading. If no segment is ever freed, it is possible to load all segments into
   memory at once if sufficient memory is present.

Loading a Segment
   When a segment is loaded, the call to the segment loader tells it what
   segment is desired. The segment number is used to index into the segment
                    Aztec C Reference Manual


   data table and get the file offset of the segment in the output file. The
   segment loader seeks to the offset and calls the DOS loader to load the
   segment. The hunks in the segment are added to the segment list of the
   program. "Hunk" is a subdivision of a segment.
   Once the segment is loaded, the segment loader walks through the segment
   Jump Table, changing each entry into an absolute reference. It uses the hunk
   data tables to find the correct load address and the number of entries per
   hunk. See the AmigaDos Technical Reference Manual for more details on
   hunks and the Arniga executable file format.

Unloading a Segment
   When a segment is unloaded, the above process occurs in reverse. The
   absolute jumps are converted back to the bsr and offset, the hunks of the
   segment are removed from the segment list, and the segment is unloaded.
   Segments are only unloaded by manual calls from the program to unload
   a segment, using the freesegO call. The argument is the address of a
   function in the segment.
   For example, if foo () is declared to be a function in the segment to be
   unloaded, the call to freeseg () looks like:
      int foo () ;
      freeseg(foo);


Segload
   The segment loader itself is a routine that has the name .segload. When you
   specify segmentation, the linker searches for the .segload routine. A default
   version of .segload is supplied in the c.lib library as well as in the lib
   directory in the file segload.o.
   Because .segload is not directly callable from a C routine, there is also a user
   callable routine, segloadO, which takes as its argument the name of a
   function within the required segment. segloadO then loads the appropriate
   segment into memory without actually calling a function in the segment.
   This can be used by a program that wants a number of segments to be
   loaded at the beginning of the program before any other activity occurs.
                              Technical Information



Linking and Startup Code
   When segmented code is used, remember that the startup code for the
   program must always be in the root segment. If it is not, an error will occur
   in the linker. The startup code may be forced into the root segment in two
   ways-by either linking the c.lib library into the root segment, or linking
   just the individual module which contains the startup code into the root
   segment.
   To place the user-referenced library functions into the root segment after all
   the other segments are linked, use
      In prog.o +o~ -lc

   where prog. 0 represents your own object modules.
   To put just the startup code into the root segment and not the entire library,
   link in either the crt~ . 0 or lcrt~ . 0 files (for either small code, small data
   or large code, large data, respectively) like this:
      In +0 prog.o +o~ crt~.o +0 -lc

   (More about linking may be found under "Code Segmentation".)

Segment Construction
   All references between segments are made through a segment Jump Table
   located in the data hunk. Initially, the reference contains the following 8
   bytes:
      bsr            .segload          ;segment loader routine
      dc.b           segnum            ;number of segment to load
      dc.b           hioffset          ;high 8 bits of .24 bit offset
      dc.w           looffset          ;low 16 bits of 24 bit offset

   After the segment is loaded, each entry looks like:
      jmp            absolute          ;relocated address of symbol
      dc.w           offset            ;saved offset to .segload
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



Segment Data Table
   The segment data table has two parts. The first part consists of eight bytes
   each of segment data:
      dc.l         seg_offset         ;offset to segment in file
      dc.w         tabl offset        ;offset of segment's entries
      dc.w         hunk offset        ;relative offset of hunk data


Hunk Data
   Following the segment data is the hunk data which consists of:
      dc.w                           ;number of the hunk
      dc.w                           ;number of symbols in Jmptab


   The hunk data for each segment is terminated by a long word of zero.


SEGMENTED CODE
   As stated, with Aztec C, you can create and execute programs that are larger
   than available memory by dividing a program's executable code into
   several segments. A segment is brought into memory when needed; when
   it is no longer needed, the memory it occupied can be released and reused.
   This section describes the creation and use of segmented programs. It is
   divided into the following paragraphs:

       • Programmer Information. Describes how you write programs
         having segmented code.

       • Operator Information. Describes how you link programs having
         segmented code.

Programmer Information
   There are two areas of concern for programs whose code is segmented: how
   segments are loaded and unloaded, and how programs access global and
   static data.
                            Technical Information



   SEGMENTATION already described how to load and unload programs.
   Here we will deal with Global and Static Data.

   Global and Static Data
   There is only one global and static data segment for a program, regardless
   of the number of code segments it has. This segment is loaded automatically
   along with the program's root segment, and it remains in memory during
   the entire execution of the program, independent of the state of the
   program's code segments.
   The name of each global variable in a program is unique: If several segments
   declare a global variable having the same name, they will both access the
   same variable.

Operator Information
   All of a program's code segments are created during a single activation of
   the Linker.
   The code for a command program can be divided into a maximum of 256
   segments, each of which has an identifying number between 0 and 255. All
   command programs must have a code segment 0, which is the first
   segment loaded for the program.
   The linker command that is used to create a command program whose code
   is segmented is identical to that which is used to create a command program
   whose code is unsegmented, except that the list of files are interspersed
   with the +0 option. The +0 option causes the object modules that follow it
   to be placed in a selected code segment.
   A segment number can optionally be appended to option +0, to explicitly
   select the segment into which the following modules are placed. If a
   segment number is not specified for option +0, the modules are placed in
   the next available segment.

Example
   The following command creates the command program prog, which has
   three code segments. Segment 0 contains the code for the modules
   menu. 0, subs. 0, and any needed modules from c.lib. Segment 1 contains
   the code for the modules modl . 0 and mod2 . o. Segment 2 contains the code
                    Aztec C Reference Manual


   for mod3 . 0 and mod4 .0, and any c.lib modules referenced by segments 1
   and 2 which are not in segment 0:
      ln -£ prog.lnk

   where prog.lnk contains:
      +o~ menu.o subs.o -le
      +0 modl.o mod2.o
      +0 mod3.0 mod4.0 -le


   All the files for this example could have been specified on the command
   line that activated the linker. We did not do this for two reasons: First, the
   entire command would not have fit on one line of this page. Second, you
   will also want to use -f files to link programs that have segmented code,
   since such programs usually have many modules, making it impractical to
   specify all the file and segmentation information on one line.

Including Modules from Libraries
   This example illustrates a point about library searches during the linking
   of command programs having segmented code. Library code is always
   contained in the segment where the library is defined, not where it is
   referenced. For instance, if a module x . 0 in segment 2 references a function
   in e . lib, which is linked as +o~ -le, than the referenced function will
   be placed in segment 0.
   However, in the above example we do not wish to have an overly large
   segment 0, so the c.lib library is linked in twice. Therefore, when the
   menu.o and subs. 0 modules are linked, only the routines within the
   e . lib library that they reference will be contained within segment 0.
   When any of the other object modules reference functions with e . lib,
   those functions will be placed into segment 2.

Reselectlng Segments
   The Linker allows individual segments to be selected more than once on
   the link line. In this case, the modules specified following the reselection
   are appended to the code that is already in the segment. A segment can be
   reselected any number of times.
                           Technical Information



  For example, the above example can be modified so that all c.lib modules
  referenced by all segments are included in segment 0, by modifying
  prog.link as follows:
     +0 menu.o subs.o
     +0 modl.. 0 mod2. 0
     +0 mod3.0 mod4.0
     +0" -l.c

  The +0121 reselects segment 0, so that the modules pulled from c.lib are
  included in segment 0.


Object Module Libraries
  Several libraries of object modules are provided with Aztec C. The base
  libraries are:

     e c.lib       nonfloating point functions
     emf.lib       Motorola Fast Floating Point (32-bit) math functions
     e ma.lib      Amiga IEEE floating point (64-bit)
     em.lib        Manx IEEE floating point (96-bit)
     e m8.lib      68881 math library
     e s.lib       screen functions

  There are several versions of each library, depending on code, data, and
  integer size. Libraries which use 32 bit ints have the number 32 in their
  name; libraries which use large code/large data have the letter "1" in their
  name; libraries which make use of the 68881 coprocessor have an 8 in their
  name. For example, the large code/large data c.lib library is called cl.lib,
  and the large code/large data, 32 bit int c.lib library is called c132.lib.


Assembly Language Functions
  This section discusses assembly language functions that can be called by,
  and themselves call, C language functions. It first discusses the conventions
  that such functions must follow, and then discusses the in-line placement
  of assembly language statements within C language functions.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



CONVENTIONS FOR C CALLABLE, ASSEMBLY
LANGUAGE FUNCTIONS
   A C callable, assembly language function must obey the conventions that
   are described in the following paragraphs.

Names of External Functions and Variables
   The C compiler translates the name of a function or variable to assembly
   language by truncating the name to 31 characters and prepending an
   underscore character. Thus, assembly language modules that are to be
   accessible from C language modules or that are to access C modules must
   obey this convention.
   For example, the following C language module calls the function bmp () ,
   which simply adds 10 to the global short count. A C language module refers
   to this function as bmp () , and an assembly language module refers to it as
   _bmp.
      int count;
      main 0
      {
      bmp () ;
      }



   An assembly language version of _bmp could be:
      #asm
          dseg
          public count
          cseg
          public _bmp
      _bmp:
          add.w #1~, count
          rts
          end
      #endasm
                              Technical Information



   Note: #asm and #endasm are needed in order to incorporate assembly
   language routines into C code. See the section Embedded Assembler
   Source in this chapter for more information.

Function Calls and Returns
   The assembly language code generated by the compiler for a C language
   call to another function pushes the arguments onto the stack, in the reverse
   order in which they were specified in the call's argument list, and then calls
   the function.                        .
   An assembly language function returns to a C function caller by issuing an
   rts instruction and leaving the caller's arguments on the stack. The caller
   then removes the arguments from the stack.
   A function returns an integer, pointer, or Fast Floating Point value in register
   do. IEEE Floating Point values are returned in the register pair do/dl,
   unless using the 68881 which uses £po.
   For example, consider the following assembly language function, _sub,
   that takes two short arguments that are passed to it on the stack, subtracts
   them, and returns the difference as the function value. A C language
   function refers to this function using the name sub.
              cseq
              pub1ic           sub
           sub:
             move.w          4 (sp) ,cW        ;qet first argument
              sub.w          6(sp),cW          ;subtract 2nd from first
              rts


   The following C function calls sub to subtract b from a, and stores the
   difference in c
      main ()
       {
             short a,b,c;
                   c = sub(a,b);
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



Global Variables
   A C module's global variables are in either the uninitialized data segment
   or in the initialized data segment.
   An assembly language module can create an uninitialized variable that can
   be accessed by a C function, using the global directive. For example, the
   following code creates the global variable _ var, which can be accessed as
   an array by a C function, and reserves 8 bytes of storage for it.
       global _var,a


   A C function that wants to access _ var could have the following declara-
   tion:
       extern short var[];


   An assembly language module can create an initialized variable that can be
   accessed by a C function using the public directive and the de directive. For
   example, the following code creates the public variable y t r that initially
   contains a pointer to the symbol str, and that can be accessed as a char
   pointer by a C function:
                    dseg
                    public           ytr
       ytr          dc.l             str


   To access ytr, a C function could use the following declaration:
       extern char *ptr;


    An assembly language mod ule can access global initialized or uninitialized
    variables that are created in C modules by defining the variables using a
    public directive that is in the dseg segment. For example, suppose a C
                              Technical Information



   module creates a global, uninitialized short named count and a global,
   initialized short named total using the statement:
      short count, total=l;


   An assembly language module can access these variables by using the
   following directives:
           dseq
           public            _count,      total


   The above discussion assumes that the C modules and the assembly lan-
   guage modules follow the standard rule in the C language regarding
   external variables. This rule requires a global variable to be defined without
   the extern keyword in exactly one module and with that keyword in all
   other modules. Aztec C also supports a relaxed version of this rule. For
   information on this, see the Compiler chapter.

Register Usage
   Register usage is implemented according to the Amiga guidelines. An
   assembly language function that is called by a C function must save and
   restore all registers it uses, except for do, dl, ao, and al. These are compiler
   temporary registers which may be used without being saved.

Embedded Assembler Source
   Assembly language statements can be embedded in a C program between
   an #asm and an #endasm statement. The pound sign (#) must stand in
   column one of the line, and the letters must be lowercase.
   Embedded assembler code must preserve the contents of all registers it
   uses, except for do, dl, ao, and al.
   It should make no assumptions about the contents of the registers, since the
   code that the compiler currently generates for C statements may change in
   the future.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual


  To be safe, a #asm statement should be preceded by a semicolon. This
  avoids problems in which the compiler mistakenly puts a label that is the
  target of a jump statement after, rather than before, in-line assembly code.
  Global variables may be referenced as described above.
  Support is also provided to access predefined macros, function arguments,
  local variables, and file scope static identifiers. To access these from within
  a #asm block, precede the identifier name with % %. When passing output
  to the assembler, the compiler checks for the pattern %%ident.
  If found, it checks to see if ident matches any predefinied macros and
  replaces them with the actual constant values. It next checks for matches
  with any function arguments, local variables, or file scope static variables
  and replaces them with the appropriate address. If the identifier is not a
  macro, argument, auto, or static, the two percent characters and identifier
  are passed to the assembler output file.
  In general, it is safest to contain assembly code in a separate, assembly
  language module rather than embedding it in C source.


Interrupt Service Routines
  It is possible to write interrupt service routines (interrupt handlers) using
  Aztec C, without resorting to assembly language. Interrupt routines pro-
  vide real-time response to events. Interrupts are serviced by the Amiga Exec
  system routines and, if an application program specifies, an interrupt
  service routine can be called in response to a particular interrupt.
  When the interrupt occurs, the processor can be just about anywhere, with
  almost anything in its registers. The system interrupt handler preserves a
  number of registers and then calls the user service routine. However, it does
  not save all of the registers. In particular, it does not save registers d2, d3,
  and a4.
  If the interrupt service routine modifies these registers, it must first preserve
  them. Since Aztec C considers d2 and d3 to be temporary registers, it does
  not preserve them. In addition, register a4 is used as a base register to the
  global data of the program and should be modified if small code and data
  are being used.
                            Technical Information



  There are two simple ways of preserving the necessary registers. First, if the
  program is compiled with option -mcd, the compiler preserves d2 and d3
  at the entry to every function. In addition, this option forces the large code
  and data model. Therefore, register a4 need not be modified and need not
  be saved. Note that the object modules need to be linked with the c1
  library.
  The second way is necessary if you are not compiling with the -mcd option.
  Essentially, you should call two routines in the library at the beginning and
  end of your interrupt code which will save the necessary registers as well
  as setting up the a4 register for small data references. The functions are
  called -int_start () and int_end () .
  As an example. the interrupt handler intfunc looks like this:
     intfunc ()
      {




      }



  The reason the a4 register may sometimes need to be saved involves the
  different memory references models allowed by Aztec C. In the large model,
  all references are absolute and 32 bits. In the small model, references are 16
  bits and either pc-relative or relative to some base register. For Aztec C, the
  base register is a4.
  Therefore, all references are made relative to register a4. When the interrupt
  occurs, register a4 might be pointing anywhere because almost any task
  might be executing, not only ours. If a4 is not set up correctly by the
  interrupt service routine as the very first thing, the interrupt routine might
  use the a4 register to access some global variables, which could create all
  sorts of problems.


Creating SubTasks
  The Amiga's multi-tasking capability is very useful, since it is often easier
  for a separate task to handle asynchronous events without tying up the
                    Aztec C Reference Manual


  main program. An excellent example of this is the beep program in the
  examples directory. A secondary task is created to actually make the beep
  sound whenever it gets a message from the parent task.
  Creating the subtasks is discussed in the Amiga Rom Kernel Manual to some
  extent. However, there a few special considerations when using Aztec C. In
  particular, when using small code and data, there is a little extra setup that
  must be done. In this case, the a4 register is used as a base register to access
  global variables. Thus, for the program to operate correctly, a4 must point
  at the proper memory location.
  When a task is started, the registers contain somewhat arbitrary values. It
  is almost certain that A4 will not contain the appropriate value. Therefore,
  the very first thing the task should do is set up the a4 register. This is done
  by calling the routine geta4 () as the first thing in the new task's function.
  For example:
     main()
      {
           void subtask();
            CreateTask("TASK", (l.ong)PRI,subtask,
           (l.ong)STKSIZ);

      }

     void subtask()

           geta4();




Floating Point Information
  There are three floating point fonnats supported by Aztec C68k on the
  Amiga. Which one you choose depends on whether you are looking for
  speed, accuracy, or whether you have a math coprocessor on your machine.
                           Technical Information



HOW TO CREATE A FLOATING POINT FORMAT PROGRAM
  When using floating point, there are two rules that must be followed for
  your program to work correctly.

     • Compile with the desired floating point option

     • Link with the corresponding floating point library and place that
       before the c.lib

FLOATING POINT FORMATS
  The compiler generates code to use the appropriate format based on one of
  the following options: -ff, which is the Motorola Fast Floating Point; -fa,
  which is the Amiga IEEE Double Precision Floating Point Emulation; -fm,
  which is the Manx IEEE Double Precision Floating Point Emulation; and
  -f8, which is the 68881 Floating Point. These are all described in detail in
  the Compiler chapter.
  The MathFFP library and the MathIeeeDoubBas library are opened on the
  first access of a floating point function when using the mf.lib or ma.lib
  library.
  For example, if a program wished to use the Amiga IEEE format to achieve
  better floating point precision, the program would be compiled and linked
  this way:
     cc -fa prog.c
     1n prog.o -lma -lc



Building Programs that Run from Workbench
OVERVIEW
  This section discusses how to build programs that run from the Workbench.
  First, however, read the Amiga ROM Kernel Manual which discusses the
  Workbench.
                    Aztec C Reference Manual



  There are two ways for a program running from the Workbench to operate.
  First, the program can handle all its own I/O by creating windows,
  attaching a console device to the window, and getting input from the
  console and/ or Intuition. In this case, there is not much to discuss because
  everything is handled by the programmer.
  The second way is for the program to use the standard input and output
  channels that are assumed by the program to be preopened by the startup
  code. In this case, the program is doing most or all of its operations as
  though it were running on a simple line-oriented terminal. The trick here
  is to get a window opened by the startup code. This is accomplished by the
  _wb_parseO routine, which scans the Tool Array types, which are part of
  the Icon used to invoke the tool. It scans the array for a definition like the
  following:
     WINDOW=xxxx

  If found, the rou tine attempts to open the specified string and, if successful,
  sets pr_CIS and pf_COS to the window. Then, _mainO, stdin, stdout, and
  stderr are set up for the window as well. If not found, stdin, stdout, and
  stderr are not initialized and any output is thrown away.
  Note that this allows for debugging messages to be placed in a program
  and only displayed when the appropriate ToolType is set.
  The only other note of importance is that when a program runs from the
  Workbench, the initial Workbench startup message is passed as argv to
  main with argc set to zero. However, for compatibility, the global variable
  WBenchMsg is initialized to point to the startup message as well.


STEP BY STEP
  This section describes the step by step procedure to produce a program that
  displays the "Hello world!" message from the Workbench. Boot the
                          Technical Information



system using the sys:l disk and place the sys:2 disk in the second drive.
Type the following commands:
   cd ram:
   copy * hello.c

   maine)
   {
         printf("Hello world!\n");
         getchar();

   "'\
   cc hello.c
   In hello.o -lc


At this point, run the hello program just to make sure it works from the CLI.
The reason the getchar () routine is called is to give you time to see the
message when you run from the Workbench.

Type:
   iconed


The IconEd program starts and displays a screen with some information.
Click the OK button and, in the menu, select clear frame to erase the existing
picture. You may exercise your artistic freedom and make any kind of icon.
Once your have your icon designed, select save from the menus. A small
requester appears. Change the filename to "hello". Click in the "Save entire
image" box and close the window to exit the program. Type the following
line:
   loadwb


This command starts up the Workbench, so resize the CLI's window until
you can see the disk icons. Clock on the Ram: icon and you should see your
                 Aztec C Reference Manual


Hello icon. Click on this icon once. This selects it but does not attempt to
execute it. Now, from the WORKBENCH menu, select INFO.
Selecting INFO should bring a window up with a number of gadgets and
some information about the icon. Toward the bottom of the window is a
single line: "TOOL TYPES string gadget". Click on the ADD button, click in
the string gadget and type the following line:
   WINDOW=CON:O/O/SOO/30/Hello


Then click on the ADD button again, and then click on the SAVE button in
the bottom left-hand comer of the window.
That is all there is to it! Double click on the Hello icon now and the window
should appear with the message waiting for a line to be typed. Press <CR>
to end the program and the window disappears.
           ERROR MESSAGES



Chapter 9 - Error Messages
  This chapter discusses error messages that can be generated by the com-
  piler, assembler, and linker. It is divided into three sections: the first sum-
  marizes the compiler messages, the second the assembler, and the third
  discusses linker error messages.
  A complete list of all error messages is provided on the next few pages. The
  error message explanations begin on page 9-11.
                   Aztec C Reference Manual



List of Error Messages
Compiler Error Messages
  1: bad digit in octal constant
  2: string space exhausted
  3: unter.minated string
  4: argument type mismatch
  5: invalid type for function
  6: inappropriate arguments
  7: bad declaration syntax
  8: syntax error in typecast
  9: invalid operand of & (address of)
  10: array size must be positive integer
  11: data type too complex
  12: invalid pointer reference
  13: un~lemented type
  14: long switches not supported
  15: storage class conflict
  16: data type conflict
  17: internal
  18: data type conflict
  19: bad syntax
  20: structure redeclaration
  21: missing}
  22: syntax error in structure declaration
  23: syntax error in enum declaration
  24: need right parenthesis or comma in arg list
  25: structure member name expected here
  26: must be structure/union member
  27: invalid typecast
  28: incompatible structures
  29: invalid use of structure
  30: missing: in ? conditional expression
  31: call of non-function
                     Error Messages


32:   invalid pointer calculation
33:   invalid type
34:   undefined symbol
35:   typedef not allowed here
36:   no more expression space
37:   invalid or missing expression
38:   no auto. aggregate initialization allowed
39:   enum redeclaration
40:   internal [see error 17]
41:   initializer not a constant
42:   too many initializers
43:   initialization of undefined structure
44:   missing right paren in declaration
45:   bad declaration syntax
46:   missing closing brace
47:   open failure on include file
48:   invalid symbol name
49:   multiply defined symbol
50:   missing bracket
51:   lvalue required
52:   too many right paren's
53:   multiply defined label
54:   too many labels
55:   missing quote
56:   missing apostrophe
57:   line too long
58:   invalid # encountered
59:   macro too long
60:   loss of const/volatile info
61:   reference to undefined structure
62:   function body must be compound statement
63:   undefined label
64:   inappropriate arguments
65:   invalid function argument
66:   expected comma
                 Aztec C Reference Manual



67: invalid else
68: bad statement syntax
69: missing semicolon
70: goto needs a label
71: statement syntax error in do-while
72: statement syntax error in for
73: statement syntax error in for body
74: expression must be integer constant
75: missing colon on case
76: too many cases in switch
77: case outside of switch
78: missing colon on default
79: duplicate default
80: default outside of switch
81: break/continue error
82: invalid character
83: too many nested includes
84: constant expression expected
85: not an argument
86: null dimension in array
87: invalid character constant
88: not a structure
89: invalid use of register storage class
90: symbol redeclared
91: invalid use of floating point type
92: invalid type conversion
93: invalid expression type for switch
94: invalid identifier in macro definition
95: obsolete
96: missing argument to macro
97: too many arguments in macro definition
98: not enough arguments in macro reference
99: internal [see error 17]
100: internal [see error 17]
101: missing close parenthesis on macro reference
                      Error lVlleS~;al!,es


102:    macro arguments too long
103":   #else with no #if
104:    #endif with no #if
105:    #endasm with no #asm
106:    #asm within #asm block
107:    missing #endif
108:    missing #endasm
109:    #if value must be integer constant
110:    invalid use of : operator
111:    invalid use of a void expression
112:    invalid use of function pointer
113:    duplicate case in switch
114:    macro redefined
115:    keyword redefined
116:    field width must be > 0
117:    invalid 0 length field
118:    field is too wide
119:    field not allowed here
120:    invalid type for field
121:    ptr/int conversion
122:    ptr & int not same size
123:    far/huge ptr & ptr not same size
124:    invalid ptr/ptr expression
125:    too many subscripts or indirection on integer
126:    too many arguments
127:    too few arguments
128:    #error
129:    #elif with no #if
130:    obsolete
131:    ## at the beginning/end of macro body
132:    obsolete
133:    # not followed by a parameter
134:    name of macro parameter was not unique
135:    attempt to undefine a predefined macro
136:    invalid #include directive
                          Aztec C Reference Manual



   137: macro buffer overflowed
   138: missing right paren
   139: missing identifier
   140: obsolete
   141: invalid character
   142: range-modifier ignored
   143: range-modifier syntax error
   144: invalid operand for sizeof
   145: function called without prototype
   146: constant value too large
   147: invalid hexadecimal constant
   148: invalid floating constant
   149: invalid character on control line
   150: unterminated comment
   151: no block level extern initialization
   152: missing identifier in parameter list
   153: missing ststic function definition
   154: function definition can't be via typedef
   155: file must contain external definition
   156: wide string literal not allowed here
   157: incompatible function declarations
   158: called function may not return incomplete type
   159: syntax error in #pragma
   160: auto variable not used in function
   161: function defined without prototype
   162: can't take address of register class
   163: upper bits of hex character constant ignored
   164: non-void type function must have return value
   165: item not previously declared found in prototype


Fatal Compiler Error Messages
   In the following "%%" is used to indicate a variable number of items can
   appear at that place.
                        Error



   out of memory!
   unable to execute %%
   too many -i options
   illegal '-%%' option: %%
   illegal '-h' option: '%%'
   multiple '-h' options specified
   more than one output file name specified
   illegal option: '%%'
   illegal 3.6 option: '%%'
   illegal 3.6 '+x' option: '%%'
   multiple input files specified!
   can't open file '%%' for input!
   no input file was specified!
   cannot create output file '%%'!
   too few arguments for '%%' option!
   dump file not found!
   pre-compiled header not in proper format!
   pre-compiled header uses wrong size int!
   error reading dump file!
   error creating dump! !
   Internal Errors
   attempt to release item already free
   attempt to use expression tree entry twice
   optim failure
   out of registers!
   bad arginfo
   bad op in cgen: 'op'
   bad cast - 'cast'


Assembler Error Messages
Opcode Error Messages
   addressing mode not valid
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



   Need data or address register as index
   Only Wand L are valid modifiers
   Scale must be 1, 2, 4, or 8
   Field width must be in range (0-31)
   Need data register here
   Missing':' in bit field syntax
   Field width must be in range (1-32)
   Missing '}' in bit field syntax
   Need opcode, directive or macro name here
   Unimplemented opcode
   Size extension not allowed on this opcode
   Post incrementing illegal in this mode
   second argument must be immediate
   Need register list as one of the operands
   Need FP register list as one of the operands (mc68881)
   An, Dn, modes not supported
   illegal function code (mc68851)
   pmove PSR, (ea) not allowed (mc68851)
   Opcode extension size did not match
   Bad size for expression
   Opcode operands did not match
   Illegal addressing format
   Illegal argument expression
   must be 16 bit
   must be 8 bit
   Need data register here
   Missing argument
   Bad argument
   Inval.id argument


Directive Error Messages

   Illegal character in directive arguments
   Equate directive requires a label
   Invalid expression for equate directive
                      Error lV.l't:~~"I)i:t:~



   Need absolute value here
   Set directive requires a label
   Invalid expression for set directive
   Name already defined
   Multiply defined symbol
   Register list directive requires a label
   Need register list here
   REG directive must contain register list
   Macro end out of place
   Need symbol for definition check
   Requires two strings
   Right side of test must match left side
   Illegal character in conditional
   Premature end of line in conditional string
   Conditional end directive out of place
   Need file name here
   Unable to open include file
   Need 'code' or 'data' here
   Need second argument as well
   Invalid expression for defined storage
   Unimplemented assembler directive


Syntax Errors

   bad' ('
   Missing ')'; Where's the ')'; Missing trailing
        parenthesis;
   Missing 'l'; illegal 'l';
   illegal ' ['
   bad syntax
   extra characters on line!
   Unknown token in expression
   Unknown opcode or directive
   Illegal character in string
   Bad character in line
                       Aztec C Reference Manual




Linker Error Messages
Command Line Errors:
   Unknown option <bad option letter>
   Too few arguments in command line
   No input given!
   Cannot have nested -F options.
   Too few arguments in -F file: <filename>
   Multiple entry points defined.
   Invalid overlay number


1/0 Errors

   Cannot open <filename>,err     =
                                <errno>
   Cannot open -F file: <filename>
   I/O error «errno» reading/writing output file
   Cannot write output file
   Cannot create output file: <filename>
   Cannot create symbol table output
   Error creating .map file
   Cannot create debugger symbol file<filename>
   Error creating symbol listing file
   Corrupted object files
   Object file is bad!
   Invalid operator in evaluate <hex value>
   Library format is invalid!
   Cannot read module from <input> on pass2
       or cannot find symbol, symbol name, on pass 2
   Not an object file
   Bad symbol typing information
   Line displacement too large
   Symbol name too long
                          Error .L""~''''''':'~''


Errors in Use of Memory
   Insufficient memory!
   Too many symbols!


Errors Arising From Source Code
   Undefined symbol: <symbol name>
   <symbol name> multiply defined
   passl«hex value» and pass2«hex value»values
        differ:
   or symbol type differs on pass two: <symbol name>
   Branch out of range @pc=<addr>
   Short branch to next location @pc=<addr>
   Entry point must be in root segment
   Entry point must be in first 64K of program
   Attempt to store out of bounds
   Program is too large to link
   Attempt to perform relocation in overlay code
   data ref to overlay code not in jump table
   BigCrtO.o must be in root segment
   Absolute reference from segment to segment
   Excess number of segments
   Can't do relocation from data to nonroot code
   Data +BSS +JurnpTab = 64K (code resource)
   data reference out of range-remake with large data
       model
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



Compiler Error Messages
  Note:

      • Error codes 116 and higher will not occur on Aztec C compilers
        whose version number is less than 3.

      • Error codes greater than 200 will occur only if there is something
        wrong with the compiler. If you get such an error, please send us
        the program that generated the error.


1: bad digit in octal constant
  The only numerals permitted in the base 8 (octal) counting system are zero
  through seven. In order to distinguish between octal, hexadecimal, and
  decimal constants, octal constants are preceded by a zero. Any number
  beginning with a zero must not contain a digit greater than seven. Octal
  constants look like this: 01, 027, 003. Hexadecimal constants begin with Ox
  (e.g., Oxl, OxAAO, OxFFF).


2: string space exhausted
   The compiler maintains an internal table of the strings appearing in the
   source code. Since this table has a finite size, it may overflow during
   compilation and cause this error code. The table default size is about one
   or two thousand characters depending on the operating system. The size
   can be changed using the compiler option -z. Through simple guesswork,
   it is possible to arrive at a table size sufficient for compiling your program.


3: unterminated string
   All strings must begin and end with double quotes (H). This message
   indicates that a double quote has remained unpaired.


4: argument type mismatch
   This warning is given if the argument specified in a function call does not
   match that of the function's prototype. Although the warning is given, the
                              Error Messages



  argument will be converted to the appropriate type before being passed. To
  avoid the warning, the argument can be preceded by a type cast to the
  appropriate type.


5: invalid type for function

  Functions may be declared to return any scalar type as well as certain
  aggregate types such as structures. Functions are nQ1 allowed to return
  arrays. All definitions or declarations of a function or a function pointer
  that return an array will generate this error message. For example:
      char(* f) () [];


6: inappropriate arguments
   The declaration list for the formal parameters of a function stands immedi-
   ately before the left brace of the function body, as shown below. Undeclared
   arguments default to int, though it is usually better practice to declare
   everything. Naturally, this declaration list may be empty, whether or not
   the function takes any arguments at all.
   No other inappropriate symbols should appear before the left (open) brace.
      badfunction(argl, arg2)
      shrt arg 1;   /* misspelledor invalid keyword */
      double arg 2;
      {             /* function body */
      }

      goodfunction(argl,arg2)
      float argl;
      int arg2;     /* this line is not required */
                    /* function body */



7: bad declaration syntax
   A common cause of this error is the absence of a semicolon at the end of a
   declaration. The compiler expects a semicolon to follow a variable declara-
                          Aztec C Reference Manual



  tion unless commas appear between variable names in multiple declara-
  tions.
     int i, j;              /* correct */
     char c d;              /* error 7 */
     char *sl, *s2          /* error 7 detected here             */
     float k;
  Sometimes the compiler may not detect the error until the next program
  line. A missing semicolon at the end of a #include'd file will be detected
  back in the file being compiled or in another #include file. This is a good
  example of why it is important to examine the context of the error rather
  than to rely solely on the information provided by the compiler error
  message(s).


8: syntax error in typecast
  The syntax of the cast operator must be carefully observed. A common error
  is to omit a parenthesis:
     i   = 3 * (int number);           /* incorrect usage */
     i   = 3 * «int) number) ;         /* correct usage *


9: invalid operand of & (address of)
  This error is given if the program attempts to take the address of something
  that does not have an address associated with it.
     #define FOUR 4
     char *addr;

     addr = &FOUR; /* error 9, can't take
                        the address of a constant */
                               Error



10: array size must be positive integer
  The dimension of an array must be grea ter than zero. A dimension less than
  or equal to zero becomes 1 by default. As can be seen from the following
  example, a dimension of zero is not the same as leaving the brackets empty.
      char badarray[O];                     /* meaningless */
      extern char goodarray[];              /* good */
  Empty brackets are used when declaring an array that has been defined
  (given a size and storage in memory) somewhere else (that is, outside the
  current function or file). In the above example, goodarray is external.
  Function arguments should be declared with a null dimension:
      func(sl,s2)
      char sl[], s2[];



11: data type too complex
   This message is best explained by example:
      char *******foo;
   The form of this declaration implies six pointers-to-pointers. The seventh
   asterisk indicates a pointer to a char. The compiler is unable to keep track
   of so many "levels". Removing just one of the asterisks will cure the error.
   However it is to be hoped that such a construct will never be needed.


12: invalid pointer reference
   This error message will occur if pointer indirection is attempted on a type
   which cannot physically represent a printer value. The only types, other
   than printers themselves, which can hold printer values, are int, short, and
   long (as well as their unsigned counterparts). All other C types will generate
   this error. For example,
      char c;
      *c = 5;
   will generate this error.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



13: unimplemented type
  This error should not occur with the current compiler since all the ANSI
  specified data types are supported. In previous versions of the compiler,
  the enum keyword was allowed but the type was not supported.


14: long switches not supported
   This error should not occur with versions 5.0 and higher, since long
   switches are supported.


15: storage class conflict
   Only automatic variables and function parameters can be specified as
   register.
   This error can be caused by declaring a static register variable. While
   structure members cannot be given a storage class at all, function argu-
   ments can be specified only as register.
   A register int i declaration is not allowed outside a function--it will generate
   error 89 (see below).


16: data type conflict
   The basic data types are not numerous, and there are not many ways to use
   them in declarations. The possibilities are listed below.

   This error code indicates that two incompatible data types were used in
   conjunction with one another. For example, while it is valid to say long
   int i, and unsigned int j, it is meaningless to use double int k or
   float char c. In this respect, the compiler checks to make sure that int,
   char, float and double are used correctly.
                               Error


        data type                       interpretation            size (bytes)

        char                            character                       1
        int                             integer                         2
        unsigned/unsigned int           unsigned integer                2
        short                           integer                         2
        long/long integer               long integer                    4
        float                           floating point number           4
        long float/double               double precision float          8

17: internal.
   This error message should not occur. It is a check on the internal workings
   of the compiler and is not known to be caused by any particular piece of
   code. However, if this error code appears, please bring it to the attention of
   Manx, as it could be a bug in the compiler.


18: data type confl.ict
   This message indicates an error in the use of the long or unsigned data type.
   long can be applied as a qualifier to int and float. unsigned can be used
   with char, int and long.
      l.ong ii                         /* a l.ong int */
      l.ong float di                   /* a doubl.e */
      unsigned Ui                      /* an unsigned int */
      unsigned char Ci
      unsigned long l.i
      unsigned float fi                /* error 18 */


19: bad syntax
   This error occurs if the #line preprocessor directive is followed by some-
   thing other than a numeric constant or macro that expands to one.
      #l.ine 100 "fil.ename"           /* correct */
      #l.ine "fil.ename"               /* error 19 */
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



20: structure redeclaration
  This message informs you that you have tried to redefine a structure.


21: missing}
   The compiler requires a comma after each member in the list of fields for a
   structure initialization. After the last field, it expects a right (close) brace.
   For example, this program fragment will generate error 21, since the in-
   itialization of the structure named emily does not have a closing brace:
      struct john {
         int bone;
         char license[10];
      } emily = {
         1,
         "23-4-1984";


22: syntax error in structure declaration
   This error occurs in a structure declaration that is missing the opening curly
   brace or when the left curly brace is followed by a right curly brace with
   nothing but white space.
      struct     /* error 22, missing left curly brace */
         int a;
         long b;
       }



23: syntax error in enum declaration
   This error occurs in an enum specification that is missing the opening curly
   brace or when the left curly brace is followed by a right curly brace with
   nothing but white space.
      enum colors {
             /* error 23, nothing in enumerator list */
                               Error



24: need right parenthesis or comma in arg list
  The right parenthesis is missing from a function call. Every function call
  must have an argument list enclosed by parentheses even if the list is empty.
  A right parenthesis is required to terminate the argument list.
  In the following example, the parentheses indicate that getchar is a
  function rather than a variable.
      getchar();
  This is the equivalent of
      CALL getchar
   which might be found in a more explicit programming language. In
   general, a function is recognized as a name followed by a left parenthesis.
   With the exception of reserved words, any name can be made a function by
   the addition of parentheses. However, if a previously defined variable is
   used as a function name, a compilation error will result.
   Moreover, a comma must separate each argument in the list. For example,
   error 24 will also result from this statement:
      funccall(argl, arg2 arg3);


25: structure member name expected here
   The symbol name following the dot operator or the arrow must be valid. A
   valid name is a string of alphanumerics and underscores. It must begin with
   an alphabetic (a letter of the alphabet or an underscore). In the last line of
   the following example, (salary) is not valid because '(' is not an al-
   phanumeric.
      empptr = &anderson;
      empptr->salary = 12000;                   /* these three lines */
      (*empptr) . salary = 12000;               /* are */
      anderson.salary = 12000;                  /* equivalent */
      empptr = &anderson.;                      /* error 25 */
      empptr- = 12000;                          /* error 25 */
      anderson. (salary) = 12000;               /* error 25 */
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



26: must be structure/union member
  The defined structure or union has no member with the name specified. If
  the -s option was specified, no previously defined structure or union has
  such a member either.
   Structure members cannot be created at will during a program. Like other
   variables, they must be fully defined in the appropriate declaration list.
   Unions provide for variably typed fields, but the full range of desired types
   must be anticipated in the union declaration.


27: invalid typecast
   It is not possible to cast an expression to a function, a structure, or an array.
   This message may also appear if a syntax error occurs in the expression to
   be cast.
      structure david { ... } amy;
      amy = (struct david) (expression );                       /*error 27*/


28: incompatible structures
   C permits the assignment of one structure to another. The compiler will
   ensure that the two structures are identical. Both structures must have the
   same structure tag. For example:
      struct david emily;
      struct david amy;

      emily = amy;


29: invalid use of structure
   Not all operators can accept a structure as an operand. Also, structures
   cannot be passed as arguments.However, it is possible to take the address
   of a structure using the ampersand (&), to assign structures, and to reference
   a member of a structure using the dot operator.
                               Error Messages



30: missing       in ? conditiona1 expression
  The standard syntax for this operator is:
      expression? statementl : statement2
  It is not desirable to use ?: for extremely complicated expressions; its
   purpose lies in brevity and clarity.


31: ca11 of non-function
   Error 31 is generated by an expression that attempts to call a data item. The
   following code will generate an error 31:
      int a;
      a();
   Error 31 is often caused by an expression that is missing an operator. For
   example, Error 31 will be generated if the expression a * (b + c ) is coded
   a (b + c) .


32: inva1id pointer ca1cu1ation
   Pointers may be involved in three calculations. An integral value can be
   added to or subtracted from a pointer. Pointers to objects of the same type
   can be subtracted from one another and compared to one another. Since the
   comparison and subtraction of two pointers is dependent upon pointer
   size, both operands must be the same size.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



33: inval.id type
   The unary minus (-) and bit complement (-) operators cannot be applied
   to structures, pointers, arrays and functions. There is no reasonable inter-
   pretation for the following:
      int function () ;
      char array[12];
      struct joey , alice;
      a = -array;
      b = -alice;
      c = -function & WRONG;


34: undefined symbol
   The compiler will recognize only reserved words and names which have
   been previously defined. This error is often the result of a typographical
   error or due to an omitted declaration.


35: typedef not allowed here
   Symbols which have been defined as types are not allowed within expres-
   sions. The exception to this rule is the use of sizeof(expression) and the cast
   operator. Compare the accompanying examples:
      struct lucil.l.e {
          int i;
      } andrew;
      typedef double bigfloat;
      typedef struct lucille foo;
      j =4 * bigfloat f;                            /* error 35 */
      k = &foo;                                     /* error 35 */
      x= sizeof(bigfloat);
      y= sizeof(foo);                               /* good */
   The compiler will detect two errors in this code. In the first assignment, a
   typecast was probably intended; compare error 8. The second assignment
   makes reference to the address of a structure type. However, the structure
   type is just a template for instances of the structure (such as andrew). It is
                              Error lV.u~:>:>d~'~:>



  no more meaningful to take the address of a structure type than any other
  data type, as in &int.


36: no more expression space
  This message indicates that the expression table is not large enough for the
  compiler to process the source code. It is necessary to recompile the file
  using the -e option to increase the number of available entries in the
  expression table. For more information, see the Compiler chapter.


37: invalid or missing expression
  This error occurs in the evaluation of an expression containing a unary
  operator. The operand either is not given or is itself an invalid expression.
  Unary operators take just one operand; they work on just one variable or
  expression. If the operand is not simply missing, as in the example below,
  it fails to evaluate to anything its operator can accept. The unary operators
  are logical not (!), bit complement (-), increment (++), decrement (-), unary
  minus H, typecast, pointer-to (*), address-of (&), and sizeof.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



38: no auto. aggregate initia1ization a110wed
  Automatic arrays and structures may not be initialized. Static and external
  aggregates may be initialized, but by default their members are set to zero.
      chararray[S]        = {'a', 'b', 'c', 'd'};
      function()
      {
           static struct suzanne
              int bone;
              char 1icense[10];
              danie1 = {
           1,
           "123-4-1984"
      };

      char autoarray [2] = { , f',           , g'   };    /* no good */
      extern char array[];



   There are three variables in the above example, two of which are correctly
   initialized. The variable array may be initialized because it is external. Its
   first four members will be given the characters as shown. The fifth member
   will be set to zero.
   The structure danie1 is static and may be initialized. Notice that 1icense
   cannot be initialized without first giving a value to bone. There are no
   provisions in C for setting a value in the middle of an aggregate.
   The variable autoarray is an automatic array. That is, it is local to a
   function and it is not declared to be static. Automatic variables reappear
   automatically every time a function is called, and they are guaranteed to
   contain garbage. Automatic aggregates cannot be initialized.
                               Error



39: enum redeclaration
  This error occurs when an enum identifier is used more than once in
  defining the value of enumeration constants.
      enum states { NY, CA, PA }
      enum states { IL, FL, NJ }
             /* error 39, states has already been used */


40: internal [see error 17]


41: initializer not a constant
   In certain initializations, the expression to the right of the equal sign (=)
   must be a constant. Indeed, only automatic and register variables may be
   initialized to an expression. Such initializations are meant as a convenient
   shorthand to eliminate assignment statements. The initialization of statics
   and globals actually occurs at link-time, and not at run-time.

          int i = 3;
          static int j       = (2 + i);                     /* illegal */


42: too many initializers
   There were more values found in an initialization than array or structure
   members exist to hold them. Either too many values were specified or there
   should have been more members declared in the aggregate definition.
   In the initialization of a complex data structure, it is possible to enclose the
   initializer in a single set of braces and simply list the members, separated
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



  by commas. If more than one set of braces is used, as in the case of a structure
  within a structure, the initializer must be entirely braced.
     struct {
        struct {
           char array[];
        } substruct;
       superstruct        =
     version 1:

           "aBDdefghij"
      };
     version 2:


             { 'a','b','c', ... , ' i ' , ' j ' }

      };


  In version 1, the initializers are copied byte-far-byte onto the structure,
  superstruct.
  Another likely source of this error is in the initialization of arrays with
  strings, as in:
     char array[10]        = "aBDdefghij";
  This will generate error 42 because the string constant on the right is
  null-terminated. The null terminator ('\0' or OxOO) brings the size of the
  initializer to 11 bytes, which overflows the ten-byte array.


43: initialization of undefined structure
  An attempt has been made to assign values to a structure which has not yet
  been defined.
     struct david { ... };
     struct dog david = { 1, 2, 3};                        /* error 43 */
                              Error Mess



44: missing right paren in declaration
  This error occurs in the declaration of a function pointer when the right
  parenthesis is left out.
     int (* fp) () ;                    /* error 44 */
     int (* fp () ;                     /* error 44 */


45: bad declaration syntax
  This error code is an all purpose means for catching errors in declaration
  statements. It indicates that the compiler is unable to interpret a word in an
  external declaration list.


46: missing closing brace
  All the braces did not pair up at the end of compilation. If all the preceding
  code is correct, this message indicates that the final closing brace to a
  function is missing. However, it can also result from a brace missing from
  an inner block.
  Keep in mind that the compiler accepts or rejects code on the basis of syntax,
  so that an error is detected only when the rules of grammar are violated.
  This can be misleading. For example, the program below will genera te error
  46 at the end even though the human error probably occurred in the while
  loop several lines earlier.
  As the code appears here, every statement after the left brace in line 6
  belongs to the body of the while loop. The compilation error vanishes
  when a right brace is appended to the end of the program, but the results
  during run time will be indecipherable because the brace should be placed
  at the end of the loop.
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



  It is usually best to match braces visually before running the compiler. A
  C-oriented text editor makes this task easier.
     main ()
     {
         int i, j;
         char array[80];
         gets(array);
         i = 0;
         while (array[i])
           putchar(array[i]);
            i++;
            for ( i=O; array[i];i++)
              for (j=i + 1; array[j]; j++)
                 printf(nelements %d and %d are ",i,                   j);
                 if (array[i] == array[j])
                    printf(nthe same\nn);
                 else
                    printf(ndifferent\nn);

         putchar('\n');
            }




47: open failure on include file
  When a file is #included, the compiler will look for it in a default area (see
  the Compiler chapter). This message will be generated if the file could not
  be opened. An open failure usually occurs when the inCluded file does not
  exist where the compiler is searching for it. Note that a drive specification
  is allowed in an include statement, but this diminishes flexibility some-
  what.


48: invalid symbol name
  This message is produced by the preprocessor, which is that part of the
  compiler which handles lines which begin with a pound sign (#). The
  source for the error is on such a line. A legal name is a string whose first
  character is an alphabetic (a letter of the alphabet or an underscore). The
                             Error



  succeeding characters may be any combination of alphanumerics (al-
  phabetics and numerals). The following symbols will produce this error
  code:
  2nd_time,
      dont do this!


49: mu1tip1y defined symbo1
  This message warns that a symbol has already been declared and that it is
  illegal to redeclare it. The following is a representative example:
      int i,   j, k, i;                      /* i11ega1 */


50: missing bracket
  This error code is used to indicate the need for a parenthesis, bracket or
  brace in a variety of circumstances.


51: 1va1ue required
   Only lvalues are allowed to stand on the left-hand side of an assignment.
   For example:
      int num;
      num = 7;


   They are distinguished from rvalues, which can never stand on the left of
   an assignment, by the fact that they refer to a unique location in memory
   where a value can be stored. An lvalue may be thought of as a bucket into
   which an rvalue can be dropped. Just as the contents of one bucket can be
   passed to another, so can an lvalue, y, be assigned to another lvalue, x:
      #define NUMBER 512
      x = y;
      1024 = z;          /* wrong;/rva1ues are reversed */
      NUMBER = x;        /* wrong; NUMBER is an rva1ue */
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



  Some operators which require lvalues as operands are increment (++),
  decrement (--), and address-of (&). It is not possible to take the address of
  a register variable as was attempted in the following example:
      register int i,         ji
      i = 3;
      j   = &ii

52: too many right paren's
   This error should never be returned from the Amiga compiler.


53:multiply defined label
   On occasions when the goto statement is used, it is important that the
   specified label be unique. There is no criterion by which the computer can
   choose between identical labels. If you have trouble finding the duplicate
   label, use your text editor to search for all occurences of the string.


54: too many labels
   The compiler maintains an internal table of labels which will support up to
   several dozen labels. although this table is fixed in size, it should satisfy the
   requiremen ts os any reasonable C program. C was structured to discourage
   extravagance in the use of gotos. Strictly speaking, goto statements are not
   required by any procedure in C; they are primarily recommended as a quick
   and simple means of exiting from a nested structure.
   This error indicates that you should significantly reduce the number of
   gotos in your program.
                              Error Messages



55: missing quote
  The compiler found a mismatched double quote (") in a #define preproces-
  sor command. Unlike brackets, quotes are not paired innermost to outer-
  most, but sequentially. So the first quote is associated with the second, the
  third with the fourth, and so on. Single quotes (') and double quotes (") are
  entirely different characters and should not be confused. The latter are used
  to delimit string constants. A double quote can be included in a string by
  use of a backslash, as in this example:
      "this is a string"
      "this is a string with an embedded quote: \". "


56: missing apostrophe
   The compiler found a mismatched single quote or apostrophe (') in a
   #define preprocessor command. Single quotes are paired sequentially (see
   error 55). Although quotes can not be nested, a quote can be represented in
   a character constant with a backslash:
      char c    = '\";
                    /* c is initialized to single quote */


57: line too long
   Lines are restricted in length by the size of the buffer used to hold them.
   This restriction varies from system to system. However, logical lines can be
   infinitely long by continuing a line with a backslash-newline sequence.
   These characters will be ignored.


58: invalid # encountered
   The pound sign (#) begins each command for the preprocessor: #include,
   #define, #if, #ifdef, #ifndef, #else, #endif, #asm, #endasm, #line and
   #undef. These symbols are strictly defined. The pound sign (#) must be in
   column one and lower case letters are required.
                           Aztec C Reference Manual


59: macro too long
   Macros can be defined with a preprocessor command of the following form:
      #define [identifier] [substitution text]
  The compiler then proceeds to replace all instances of identifier with the
  substitution text that was specified by the #define.
  This error code refers to the substitution text of a macro. Whereas ideally a
  macro definition may be extended for an arbitrary number of lines by
  ending each line with a backslash (\), for practical purposes the size of a
  macro has been limited to 255 characters.


60: loss of const/volatile info
  This error occurs when passing the address of a variable that is declared as
  const and / or volatile.
      extern const volatile int clock_time;
      set_time(&clock_time);              /* error 60 */


61: reference to undefined structure
  This message comes in two forms:
  1) As a warning, due to referencing an undefined structure member.

  2) As an error, when trying to obtain the size of an undefined structure.
      a   = sizeof(struct nodef);
                /* error 61 unless nodef has been defined */

62: function body must be compound statement
  The body of a function must be enclosed by braces, even though it may
  consist of only one statement:
      function()
      {
          return 1;
                                Error Mess



  This error can also be caused by an error inside a function declaration list,
  as in:
      func(a, b)
      int a; chr b;




63: undefined 1abe1
  A goto statement is meaningless if the corresponding label does not appear
  somewhere in the code. The compiler disallows this since it must be able to
  specify a destination to the computer.
  It is not possible to go to a label outside the present function (labels are local
  to the function in which they appear). Thus, if a label does not exist in the
  same procedure as its corresponding goto, this message will be generated.



64: inappropriate arguments
  When a function is declared (as opposed to defined), it is poor syntax to
  specify an argument list:
      function (string)
      char *string;
      {
          char *funcl();                         /* correct */
          doub1e func2(x,y);                     /* wrong */

      }

   In this example, function () is being defined, but funcl () and func2 ()
   are being declared.
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



65: invalid function argument
  This error occurs in a function definition that contains an argument that is
  not a valid identifier.
      sub(a, 2b)      {   /* error 65 because identifiers
                          can't begin with a numeric character */


66: expected comma
  In an argument list, arguments must be separated by commas.


67: invalid else
  An else was found which is not associated with an if statement. else is
  bound to the nearest if at its own level of nesting. So if-else pairings are
  determined by their relative placement in the code and their grouping by
  braces.
      if ( ... ) {

         if ( ... )

          } else if ( ... )

          } else



   The indentation of the source text should indicate the intended structure of
   the code. Note that the indentation of the if and else- if means only that
   the programmer wanted both conditionals to be nested at the same level,
   in particular one step down from the presiding if statement. But it is the
   placement of braces that determines this for the compiler. The example
   above is correct, but probably does not conform to the expectations revealed
   by the indentation of the else statement. As shown here, the else is paired
   with the first if, not the second.
68: bad statement syntax
  The keywords used in declaring a variable, which specify storage class and
  data type, must not appear in an executable statement. In particular, all local
  declarations must appear at the beginning of a block, that is, directly
  following the left brace which delimits the body of a loop, conditional or
  function. Once the compiler has reached a non-declaration, a keyword such
  as char or int must not lead a statement; compare the use of the casting
  operator:
      func ()
      {
          int i;
          char array[12];
          fl.oat k = 2.03;
          i = 0;
          int m;                            /* error 68 */
          j = i + 5;
          i = (int) k;                      /* correct */
          if (i) {
             int i = 3;
             j = i;
             printf ("%d", i) ;

          printf("%d%d\n",i,j);



   This trivial function prints the values 3, 2 and 3. The variable i which is
   declared in the body of the conditional if lives only until the next right
   brace; then it dies, and the original i regains its identity.


69: missing semicol.on
  A semicolon is missing from the end of an executable statement. This error
  code is similar to error code 7. It will remain undetected until the following
  line and is often spuriously caused by a previous error.
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



70: goto needs a label
  Compare your use of goto with this example. This message says that you
  did not specify where you wanted to goto with label:
          goto label;

      label:

   It is not possible to goto just any identifier in the source code; labels are
   special because they are followed by a colon.


71: statement syntax error in do-while
   The body of a do-while may consist of one statement or several statements
   enclosed in braces. A while conditional is required after the body of the
   loop. This is true even if the loop is infinite, as it is required by the rules of
   syntax. After typing in a long body, do not forget the while conditional.


72: statement syntax error in for
   This error occurs when the first of the two semicolons that separate the three
   expressions found in a for loop condition are missing.
      for (i=O i; i++) {                   /* error 72 due to
                                                  missing semicolon */


73: statement syntax error in for body
   This error occurs when the second of the two semicolons that separate the
   three expressions found in a for loop condition is missing.
      for (i=O; i i++) {                   /* error 73 due to
                                                missing semicolon */
                               Error


74: expression must be integer constant
  This error occurs when a variable occurs instead of an integer constant in
  declaring the size of an array, initializing an element in an enum list, or
  specifying a case constant for a switch.


75: missing c010n on case
  This should be straightforward~ If the compiler accepts a case value, a colon
  should follow it. A semi-colon must not be accidently entered in its place.


76: too many cases in switch
  The compiler reserves a limited number of spaces in an internal table for
  case statements. If a program requires more cases than the table initially
  allows, it becomes necessary to tell the compiler what the table value should
  be changed to. It is not necessary to know exactly how many are needed;
  an approximation is sufficient, depending on the requirements of the
  situation.


77: case outside of switch
   The keyword, case, belongs to just one syntactic structure, the switch. If
   case appears outside the braces which contain a switch statement, this error
   is generated. Remember that all keywords are reserved, so that they cannot
   be used as variable names.


78: missing c010n on defau1t
   This message indicates that a colon is missing after the keyword, default.
   Compare error 75.


79: dup1icate defau1t
   The compiler has found more than one default in a switch. switch will
   compare a variable to a given list of values. But it is not always possible to
   anticipate the full range of values which the variable may take. Nor is it
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



  feasible to specify a large number of cases in which the program is not
  particularly interested.
  So C provides for a default case. The default will handle all those values
  not specified by a case statement. It is analogous to the else companion to
  the conditional, if. Just as there is one else for every if, only one default case
  is allowed in a switch statement. However, unlike the else statement, the
  position of a default is not crucial; a default can appear anywhere in a list
  of cases.


80: default outside of switch
  The keyword, default, is used just like case. It must appear within the
  brackets which delimit the switch statement.


81: break/continue error
  break and continue are used to skip the remainder of a loop in order to exit
  or repeat the loop. Break will also end a switch statement. But when the
  keywords, break or continue, are used outside of these contexts, this
  message results.


82: invalid character
   Some characters simply do not make sense in a C program, such as '$' and
   '@'. Others, for instance the pound sign (#), may be valid only in particular
   contexts.


83: too many nested includes
   #includes can be nested, but this capacity is limited. The compiler will balk
   if required to descend more than three levels into a nest. In the example
   given, file D is not allowed to have a #include in the compilation of
   fileA.
        file A              file B            file C           file D

        #include "S"       #include "C" #include "D"
                               Error Mess



84: constant expression expected
  This error occurs when an integer constant is missing, such as in initializing
  an element in an enum list, specifying a case constant for a switch, or for a
  #if preprocessor directive.


85: not an argument
  The compiler has found a name in the declaration list that was not in the
  argument list. Only the converse case is valid, i.e., an argument can be
  passed and not subsequently declared.


86: null d~nsion in array
   In certain cases, the compiler knows how to treat multidimensional arrays
   whose left-most dimensions are not given in its declaration. Specifically,
   this is true for an extern declaration and an array initialization. The value
   of any dimension which is not the left-most must be given.
      extern char array[] [12];                     /* correct */
      extern char badarray[5] [];                   /* wrong */


87: invalid character constant
   Character constants may consist of one or two characters enclosed in single
   quotes, as ' a' or I ab' . There is no analog to a null string, so " (two single
   quotes with no intervening white space) is not allowed. Recall that the
   special backslash characters (\b , \n , \t etc.) are singular, so that the
   following are valid: I \n I I I \na I I I a \n I . I aaa I is invalid.


88: not a structure
   Occurs only under compilation without the -s option. A name used as a
   structure does not refer to a structure, but to some other data type.
      int i;
      i.member = 3;                                 /* error 88 */
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



89: invalid use of register storage class
  A globally defined variable cannot be specified as a register. Register
  variables are required to be local.


90: symbol redeclared
   A function argument has been declared more than once.


91: invalid use of floating point type
   Floating point numbers can be negated (unary minus), added, subtracted,
   multiplied, divided and compared; any other operator will produce this
   error message.


92: invalid type conversion
   This error code indicates that a data type conversion, implicit in the code,
   is not allowed, as in the following piece of code:
      int i;
      float j;
      char *ptr;
      i = j + ptr;

   The diagram shows how variables are converted to different types in the
   evaluation of expressions. Initially, variables of type char and short
   become int, and float becomes double. Then all variables are promoted
   to the highest type present in the expression. The result of the expression
   will have this type also. Thus, an expression containing a float will
   evaluate to a double.
   Types have the following hierarchy:
      double float
      long
      unsigned
      int short, char
                               Error Messages



  This error can also be caused by an attempt to return a structure, since the
  structure is being cast to the type of the function, as in:
      int func ()
      {
          struct tag sam;
          return sam;



93: invalid expression type for switch
  Only a char, int or unsigned variable can be switched. See the example for
  error 74.


94: invalid identifier in macro definition
  This error occurs in a macro definition that contains one or more arguments
  that are not valid identifiers.
      #define add(a,2b) (a+2b)    /* error 94 because
        identifiers can't begin with a numeric character */


95: obsolete
   Error codes interpreted as obsolete do not occur in the current version of
   the compiler. Some simply no longer apply due to the increased adap-
   tability of the compiler. Other error codes have been translated into full
   messages sent directly to the screen. If you are using an older version of the
   prod uct and have need of these codes, please contact Manx for information.


96: missing argument to macro
   Not enough arguments were found in an invocation of a macro. Specifically,
   a "double comma" will produce this error:
      #define reverse(x,y,z)            (z,y,x)
      func(reverse(i"k»;
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



97: too many arguments in macro definition
  This error occurs in a macro definition that contains more than 32 argu-
  ments in its definition.


98: not enough args in macro reference
  The incorrect number of arguments was found in an invocation of a
  previously defined macro. As the examples show, this error is not identical
  to error 96.
      #define exchange(x,y)          (y,~     error 98 */
      func(exchange(i»;


99: interna1 [see error 17]


100: interna1 [see error 17]


101: missing c10se parenthesis on macro reference
   A right (closing) parenthesis is expected in a macro reference with argu-
   ments. In a sense, this is the complement of error 95; a macro argument list
   is checked for both a beginning and an ending.


102: macro arguments too 10ng
   The combined length of a macro's arguments is limited. This error can be
   resolved by simply shortening the arguments with which the macro is
   invoked.


103: #e1se with no #if

   Correspondence between #if and #else is analogous to that which exists
   between the control flow statements, if and else. Obviously, much depends
   upon the relative placement of the statements in the code. However, #if
                              Error Me



  blocks must always be terminated by #endif, and the #else statement must
  be included in the block of the #if with which it is associated. For example:
      #if ERROR 0
        printf ("there was an error\n") ;
      #else
        printf ("no error this time\n");
      #endif
  #if statements can be nested, as below. The range of each #if is deter-
  mined by a #endif. This also excludes #else from #if blocks to which
  it does not belong:
      #ifdef JAN1
        printf ("happy new year! \n") ;
      #if    sick
        printf("i think i'll go home now\n");
      #else
        printf("i think i'll have another\n");
      #endif
      #else
        printf("i wonder what day it is\n");
      #endif


  If the first #endif was missing, error 103 would result. And without the
  second #endif, the compiler would generate error 107.


104: #endif with no #if
   #endif is paired with the nearest #if, #ifdef or #ifndef which precedes it.
   (See error 103.)


105: #endasm with no #asm
   #endasm must appear after an associated #asm. These compiler-control
   lines are used to begin and end embedded assembly code. This error code
   indicates that the compiler has reached a #endasm without having found
   a previous #asm. If the #asm was simply missing, the error list should begin
   with the assembly code (which are undefined symbols to the compiler).
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



106: #asm within #asm block
  There is no meaningful sense in which in-line assembly code can be nested,
  so the # asm keyword must not appear between a paired # asm/ #endasm.
  When a piece of in-line assembly is augmented for temporary purposes, the
  old #asm and #endasm can be enclosed in comments as place-holders.
      #asm
         /* temporary asm code */
         /* #asm       old beginning */
         /* more asm code */
      #endasm


107: missing #endif
  A #endif is required for every #if, #ifdef and #ifndef, even if the entire
  source file is subject to a single conditional compilation. Try to assign pairs
  beginning with the first #endif. Backtrack to the previous #if and form the
  pair. Assign the next #endif with the nearest unpaired #if. When this
  process becomes greatly complicated, you might consider rethinking the
  logic of your program.


108: missing #endasm
   In-line assembly code must be terminated by a #endasm in all cases. #asm
   must always be paired with a #endasm.


109: #if value must be integer constant
   #if requires an integral constant expression. This allows both integer and
   character constants, the arithmetic operators, bitwise operators, the unary
   minus (-) and bit complement, and comparison tests.
   Assuming all the macro constants (in capitals) are integers, then
      #if DIFF = 'A'-'a'
      #if (WORD &= -MASK) > 8
      #if MAR I APR I MAY
   are all legal expressions for use with #if.
                                 Error



110: invalid use of : operator
  The colon operator occurs in two places: 1. following a question mark as
  part of a conditional, as in (flag? 1 : 0); 2. following a label inserted by
  the programmer or following one of the reserved labels, case and default.


111: invalid use of a void expression
  This error can be caused by assigning a void expression to a variable, as in
  this example:
      void func();
      int h;
      h = func(arg);


112: invalid use of function pointer
   For example,
      int (*funcptr)          ();

      funcptr++;
   funcptr is a pointer to a function which returns an integer. Although it is
   like other pointers in that it contains the address of its object, it is not subject
   to the rules of pointer arithmetic. Otherwise, the offending statement in the
   example would be interpreted as adding to the pointer the size of the
   function, which is not a defined value.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



113: duplicate case in switch
   A switch statement has two case values which are the same. Either the two
   cases must be combined into one, or one must be discarded. For instance:
      switch (c) {
      case NOOP:
        return (0);
      case MOLT:
        return (x * y);
      case Drv:
        return (x / y);
      case NOOP:
      default:
         return;


   The case of NOOP is duplicated, and will generate an error.


114: macro redefined
   For example,
      #define      islow(n)     (n>=O&&n<S)

      #define      islow (n)    (n>=O&&n<=S)
   The macro, islow, is being used to classify a numerical value. When a
   second definition of it is found, the compiler will compare the new substitu-
   tion string with the previous one. If they are found to be different, the
   second definition will become current, and this error code will be produced.
   In the example, the second definition differs from the first in a single
   character, '='. The second definition is also different from this one:
      #define islow(n) n>O&&n>=<S

   since the parentheses are missing.
                              Error Messages



  The following lines will not generate this error:
      #define NULL 0

      #define NULL 0
  But these are different from:
      #define NULL '\0'
  In practice, this error message does not affect the compilation of the source
  code. The most recent "revision" of the substitution string is used for the
  macro. But relying upon this fact may not be a wise habit.


115: keyword redefined
  Keywords cannot be defined as macros, as in:
      #define int foo
  If you have a variable which may be either, for instance, a short or a long
  integer, there are alternative methods for switching between the two. If you
  want to compile the variable as either type of integer, consider the follow-
  ing:
      #ifdef LONGINT
        10ng ii
      #e1se
         short ii
      # endif
   Another possibility is through a typedef:
      #ifdef LONGINT
        typedef 10ng              VARTYPEi
      #e1se
        typedef short              VARTYPEi
      #endif
      VARTYPE ii
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



116: field width must be > 0
   A field in a bit field structure can not have a negative number of bits.


117: invalid 0 length field
   A field in a bit field structure can not have zero bits.


118: field is too wide
   A field in a bit field structure can not have more than 16 bits.


119: field not allowed here
   A bit field definition can only be contained in a structure.


120: invalid type for field
   The type of a bit field can only be of type int of unsigned into


121: ptr/int conversion
   The compiler issues this warning message if it must implicitly convert the
   type of an expression from pointer to int or long, or vice versa.
   If the program explicitly casts a pointer to an int this message will not be
   issued. However, in this case, error 122 may occur.
   For example, the following will generate warning 121:
      char *cp;
      int i;

      i=cp;          /* implicit conversion of char to int */


   When the compiler issues warning 121, it will generate correct code if the
   sizes of the two items are the same.
                               Error IVIf'SS.<)VI'S



122: ptr & int not same size
   If a program explicitly casts a pointer to an int, and the sizes of the two
   items differ, the compiler will issue this warning message. The code that is
   generated when the converted pointer is used in an expression will use only
   as much of the least significant part of the pointer as will fit in an int.


123: far/huge ptr & ptr not same size
  This error occurs when trying to assign a near pointer to a far or huge
  pointer. A warning is generated when casting a far or huge pointer to a near
  pointer.


124: invalid ptr/ptr expression
  If a program attempts to assign one pointer to another without explicitly
   casting the two pointers to be of the same type, and the types of the two
   pointers are in fact different, the compiler will issue this warning message.
  The compiler will generate code for the assignment, and if the sizes of the
  two pointers are the same, the code will be correct. But if the sizes differ,
  the code may not be correct.


125: too many subscripts or indirection on integer
   This warning message is issued if a program attempts to use an integer as
   a pointer; that is, as the operand of a star operator.
   If the sizes of a pointer and an int are the same, the generated code will
   access the correct memory location, but if they are not, it will not.
   For example,
      char c;
      long g;
      *Ox5c=O;      /* warning 125, because Ox5c is an int */
      c[i]=O;       /* warning 125, because c+i is an int */
      g[i]=O;       /* error 12, because g+i is along */
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



126: too many arguments
  This error occurs when a function is invoked with more arguments than is
  specified in its prototype or definition. The only exception allowed is when
  a variable number of arguments is specified in the prototype.


127: too few arguments
  This error occurs when a function is invoked with less arguments than is
  specified in its prototype or definition.


128: #error
   This error is generated by the #error directive and is followed by the
   optional sequence of preprocessing tokens found in the source code.


129: #elif with no #if
   This error occurs when the #elif preprocessor directive is used without a
   preceding #if directive.


130: obsolete [see error 95]


131: ## at the beginning/end of macro body
   This error occurs when a ## is found as the first or last end of a macro
   definition body.
      #define TWOSHARP 2##                    /* error 131 */


132: obsolete[see error 95]


133: # not followed by a parameter
   This error may occur in a #define macro in which the # operator is applied
   to a parameter in the replacement list. If the # token is not followed by a
   parameter, this error message will be generated.
                             Error Messages



134: name of macro parameter was not unique
  This error should never be returned from the Amiga compiler.


135: attempt to undefine a predefined macro
  This error occurs when attempting to use a #undef on those macros that
  are predefined by the compiler, such as _STDC--, _TIME--, _DATE--1
  _FILE----' _LINE--, and _FUNC_.
      #undef      TIME                /* error 135 */

136: invalid #include directive
   This error occurs when the #include directive is not followed by a string
   literal or a filename enclosed in < > signs.
      #include filename               /* error 136 */


137: macro buffer overflowed
  This error should never be returned from the Amiga compiler.


138: missing right paren
  This error occurs when attempting to use the defined directive with a left
  parenthesis and no matching right parenthesis.
      #if defined(AMIGA               /* error 138 */


139: missing identifier
  This error occurs when attempting to use the defined directive with no
  identifier following the defined keyword.
      #if defined                     /* error 139 */
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



140: obsolete
   [see error 95]


141: invalid character
   This error should never be returned from the Amiga compiler.


142: range-modifier ignored
   Using a range modifier (near, far, etc.) on a structure or union member is
   allowed by the parser but has no effect and is ignored.
   Note: This error should never be returned from the Amiga compiler.


143: range-modifier syntax error
   A range-modifier is illegal as part of a function declaration. You cannot say
   that a function is near, far, huge, etc.
   Note: This error should never be returned from the Amiga compiler.


144: invalid operand for sizeof
   This error occurs when attempting to obtain the sizeof of something other
   than a previously defined data structure.
      sub()
       {
      int i = sizeof(sub); /* error 144 */



145: function called without prototype
   This warning is generated for functions that are called without having been
   prototyped. It only occurs when compiling with the -wp option.
                              Error



146: constant va1ue too 1arge
  This error occurs when attempting to use a constant larger than the un-
  signed long Oxffffffff in an expression.


147: inva1id hexadecima1 constant
  This error occurs when the character following a Ox or OX is not a valid
  hexadecimal constant.
      int i = Oxq2i              /* error 147, 'g' is not
                                               a va1id hex constant */


148: inva1id f10ating constant
  This error occurs if the first letter excluding the optional sign following the
  e or E in a floating point number is something other than a digit.
      doub1e d     = 123e+f;
                              /* error 148, 'f' is not a digit */

149: inva1id character on contro1 1ine
   This error occurs on conditional preprocessor lines that expect a single
   constant expression but get extra information.
      #if CONST inva1id               /* error 149 due to
                                      extra characters "inva1id" */


150: unterminated comment
   This error occurs if the start of a comment (j*) is not terminated with (* /)
   before the end of the file.


151: no b10ck 1eve1 extern initia1ization
   This error occurs when initialization of an extern variable is attempted
   inside a function. Initialization of extems is permissible outside of func-
                            Aztec C Reference Manual


  tions, or the function can declare the variable as extern and then initialize
  it further down in the code using an assignment statement.


152: missing identifier in parameter list
  This error occurs when the type of an argument is specified in a function
  definition without being followed by the argument itself.
      sub(int ) {                 /* error 152, missing the
                                        name of the int argument */


153: missing static function definition
   This error occurs if a function has been declared as static in a file and has
   not been followed by its actual definition further down in the file.


154: function definition can't be via typedef
   This error occurs when incorrectly defining a function using a typedef. It
   is possible to define a typedef that is a function such as:
       typedef int F(void);
   which sets the type F to be a function with no arguments returning int .
   Then, a function can be declared such as:
       F f;
   which is legal. However, the function definition:
       F f       {}

   is illegal.


155: file must contain external definition
   This error occurs in a file with no external data or function definitions when
   compiling with the -pa option to use the ANSI preprocessor.
                               Error Mess



156: wide string literal not allowed here
  This error occurs when attempting to use a wide string literal with the
  #include or #line directives.
      #include L"filename"                          /* error 156 */

157: incompatible function declarations
   This error occurs if a function declaration does not match a previous
   definition or declaration for the same function.


158: called function may not return incomplete type
   This error occurs when a function attempts to return a structure which has
   not been defined. If a function is called that returns a structure, but the size
   of the structure is unknown, then it is not possible for the compiler to know
   how much data is being returned by the function and how much space to
   reserve for the return value.
   For example:
      struct foo x();

      main ()
      {
          x();
      }



159: syntax error in #pragma
  This error occurs if the #pragma is used for a function call and does not
  match the following syntax.
      #pragma regcall([return=]
         func (arg1, arg2, ... ,argn»
      #pragma amicall(base,
         offset, func (arg1, arg2, ... ,argn»
      #pragma libcall func base offset regmask
      #pragma syscall func offset regmask
                            Aztec C Reference Manual


160: auto variable not used in function
  This warning occurs when compiling with the -wu option and a function
  containing a local variable has not been used.


161: function defined without prototype
   This warning occurs:

        • when compiling with the -wp option and a function does not
          have its arguments prototyped

   or

        • if there are no arguments but you have not specified void.


162: can't take address of register class
   This error occurs when attempting to take the address of a variable that has
   been declared as a register class variable.
        register int a;
        int *ip;

        cp = &a;                            /* error 162 */



163: upper bits of hex character constant ignored
   This warning occurs if the compiler encounters a hexadecimal character
   constant (specified by \x) whose value cannot fit within a single byte. For
   example:
        char *cptr     = "\x9b7";
   will generate a warning because" \x9b7" cannot be stored within one byte.
   The compiler will ignore the most significant bits, and use the least sig-
   nificant bits. In the example the compiler will treat" \x9b7" as "\xb7".
   This warning will occur if you accidentally place a digit from 0 through 9
   or a letter from a through f immediately after a \x escape sequence. In the
                             Error ME~ss,a~E~S



  example if you intended to have Ox9b followed by the ASCII digit 7, you
  could use string concatenation to produce the desired result:
     char *cptr = "\:x:98" "7";


164: non-void type function must have return value
  This error message can occur only if the -wr compiler option is used. If the
  compiler encounters a function which is defined as returning a value (int,
  char, or t he like) but which does not have an explicit return. For example:
        int func ()
         {
             printf ("hello \n");


  would generate this message. Replacing int funch () with func () will
  not correct the error. The specification void func () will correct the
  problem. The specification of an explicit return will also.


165: item not previously declared found in prototype
  This warning message will be generated if a struct appears as an argument
  in a function prototype and there is no previous declaration for the struct.
  This warning will be generated it there is no struct declaration or if the
  struct declaration occurs after the protype statement. The sequence struct
  declaration, prototype statement, function definition will correct the prob-
  lem as in this example:
     struct astruct
          inta;
          char c;


     void func(struct astruct arg);

     void func(struct astruct arg);
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



  This problem presents special difficulties when it arises because the in-
  tended struct decalartation occurs after the prototype definition. A strict
  interpretation of ANSI rules, in this case, produces results that may seem
  arbitrary and illogical. Positioning the struct declaration so that it occurs
  before the prototype definition corrects the problem. If the problem is not
  corrected, it is unlikely that the program will run correctly.


Fatal Compiler Error Messages
  If the compiler encounters a "fatal" error, one which makes further opera-
   tion impossible, it will send a message to the screen and end the compilation
   immediately.


out of disk space!
   There is no room on the disk for the output file of the compiler. Previous
   disk files will not be overwritten by the compiler's assembly language
   output. To make room on the disk, it is usually sufficient to remove
   unneeded files from the disk.


illegal '-%%' option:
   The compiler has been invoked with an option letter which it does not
   recognize. The manual explicitly states which options the compiler will
   accept. The compiler will specify the invalid option letter.


multiple '-h' options specified
   Only one -hi or -ho option can be specified.


more than one output filename was specified
   Output from the compiler can only be directed to one file. More than one
   -0 option was found.
                                Error Messages



duplicate output file
   If an output file name has been specified with the -0 option and that file
   already exists on the disk, the compiler will not overwrite it. -0 must specify
   a new file.


too few arguments for          -0   option
   The compiler expected to find the output filename following the -0, but
   did not find it. The output file name must follow the option letter, and the
   name of the file to be compiled must occur last in the command line.


can't open file '%%' for input
   The input file specified in the command line does not exist on the disk or
   cannot be opened. A path or drive specification can be included with a
   filename according to the operating system in use.


no input file was specified!
   While the compiler was able to open the input file given in the command
   line, that file was found to be empty.


multiple input files specified
   More than one input file was specified


cannot create output file '%%'!
   The compiler was unable to create an output file. On some systems, this
   error could occur if a disk's directory is full. It may also occur if the disk is
   locked.


out of memory!
   Since the compiler must maintain various tables in memory as well as
   manipulate source code, it may run out of memory during operation. The
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



  only solutions are to add more memory to your computer or to divide the
  source file into modules which can be compiled separately. These modules
  can then be linked together to produce a single executable file.


no disk space!
   An error occurred in closing the assembly output file being written by the
   compiler. The compile therefore failed and the assembly file was deleted.
   Make additional room on the current disk or the one to which the CCTEMP
   environment variable is pointing.


unable to execute as
   An attempt to launch the assembler failed. Check to make sure the as-
   sembler has not been renamed and that it can be located in your current
   execution path.


too many -I options
   The number of include file paths has exceeded the maximum of 16 allowed.
   Try rearranging the include files into fewer directories to avoid the need to
   specify so many include file paths.


illegal "%%" option: "%%"
   A secondary option was specified that is not recognized in conjunction with
   the first letter given. The error message gives the primary and illegal
   secondary option used. See the Compiler chapter of the manual, which
   explicitly states the options that the compiler will accept.


illegal 3.6 option: '%%'
   The version 5.0 compiler will accept 3.6a options if the -3 option was
   specified. Consult a 3.6 manual for specific option details. also see discus-
   sion of -3 and -5 options.
                              Error


duplicate symbol dump file
   Indicates that the -h option has already been used with a dump file name.
   The compiler only accepts one dump file as input and cannot generate an
   output dump file if one has already been specified for input. Use the
   #include directive multiple times in a single file to include all the source
   files that are to be precompiled, and then precompile that single file.


unable to execute %%
   The compiler can chain to other programs such as the assembler or editor.
   There are various environment variables and option specification that
   determine the programs the compiler should launch and where it should
   look for them. Either the program does not exist on the disk, or the compiler
   was mislead as to its whereabouts.


too few arguments for -%% option
   The option expects a filename to follow.


dump file not found!
   This error indicates a failure on attempting to open the specified dump file
   used with the -h option. Check to make sure the correct name was used on
   the command line following the -h option.


pre-compiled header not in proper format!
   This error indicates that a precompiled dump file opened for reading did
   not contain the correct information to indicate that it is a valid dump file.
   The file is either not a dump file or the dump file has become corrupted and
   should be rebuilt.


error reading dump file!
   This error indicates that a precompiled dump file that was opened for
   reading specified a length field that was longer than that actual dump file.
   The dump file has been corrupted and should be rebuilt.
                             Aztec C Reference Manual



error creating dump
   This indicates that an error occurred in trying to open the dump file
   specified following the -ho option. Check to make sure the disk is not locked
   or full.


pre-compiled header uses the wrong size int
   The compiler will treat ints as 16 bits or 32 bits according to option settings.
   When a pre-compiled header file is used, it is mandatory that equivalent
   data size options be in effect.

Internal Errors
   The following fatal compiler error messages are internal. None of these
   errors should normally occur. If you get one, it may point to an internal
   compiler problem. Please contact Technical Support to report the problem;
   include some sample code to demonstrate it.
       attempt to use expression tree entry twice
       attempt to release item already free
       optim failure.
       out of registers!
       bad op in cgen: 'op'
       bad cast - 'cast'



Assembler Error Messages
   This section describes the error messages that the Assembler generates as
   it is creating an object module.

Opcode Error Messages

68020 addressing mode not valid
   To enable assembly of 68020 addressing modes insert the directive:
       machine mc68020
                                Error Messages



Need data or address register as index
Only Wand L are valid modifiers
Scale must be 1, 2, 4, or 8
   The fonnat of the index operand for 68020 register indirect with index
   modes is IXn.SIZE*SCALE". (See your 68020 reference manual.)


Field width must be in range (0-31)
Need data register here
Missing':' in bit field syntax
Field width must be in range (1-32)
Missing'}' in bit field syntax
   Bit fields are used in the following 68020 instructions:
      bfchg, bfclr, bfexts, bfextu, bfHo, bfins, bfset, bftst
   These instructions operate on a string of consecutive bits in a bit array.
   The syntax for a bit field is:
      {offset:width}
   The braces and colon must be included as shown. offset and width
   parameters must either be data registers or absolute expressions. offset
   must be in range (0-31). width must be in range (1-32).


Need opcode, directive or macro name here
   Label names must be defined starting in the first column of the line.


Unimplemented ope ode
   Assembler does not understand opcode. Check your syntax.
   (Note: The mnemonic TRAPcc has been changed to Tcc in the parameterless
   fonn, and TPcc is used when immediate data is specified. Similar changes
   have been made for FfRAPcc (mc68881) and PTRAPcc (mc68851).)
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



Size extension not allowed on this opcode
   Many 680XO opcodes have only one size or are specified 'unsized'.
   Example:
      pea.w (aO)                 ERROR
      pea (aO) ;                 OK


Post incrementing illegal in this mode
   Post incrementing (An)+ is only legal wi th certain opcodes.
  Example:
      add al+,dO                 ERROR
      add (al)+,dO               OK


second argument must be immediate
  Should only occur when using pflush (mc68851). The mask must be imme-
  diate.


Need register list as one of the operands
   A register list is used with movem.
   Examples:
      d3-d7               means d3, d4, d5, d6, and d7
      d5/a5               means d5 and as
      d2-d4/aO-a3         means d2, d3, d4, aO, a1, a2, and a3


Need FP register list as one of the operands (mc68881)
   fp register lists are used with fmovem. The syntax for a fp register list is
   any combination of £pcr, £psr, and £piar, with individual register names
   separated by a slash "/".
                              Error


  Examples:
      fpcr/fpsr
      fpcr/fpiar/fpsr


An, Dn, modes not supported
   Certain 68851 opcodes will not accept an or dn. (See your 68851 reference
   manual).


illegal function code (mc688s1)
   Function codes must be expressed in any of the following registers:
   dn, sfc, dfc, or as an immediate four bit number.
   Examples:
      ploadr d4, (as)
      ploadr sfc, (as)


pmove PSR, (ea) not allowed (mc688s1)
   (consult your 68851 reference manual)


Opcode extension size did not match
Bad size for expression
   Occurs when you try to use an illegal size extension.


Opcode operands did not match
Illegal addressing format
Illegal argument expression
   The address mode you are trying to use is not supported by the opcode.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



must be 16 bit
   Data must be 16 bit ($0000 - $ffff)


must be 8 bit
   Data must be 8 bit ($00 - $££)


Need data register here
   Many opcodes need a data register (dO,dl,d2 ... d7) in the operand field. You
   can usually substitute adda for add, suba for sub and cmpa for cmp.
   (Consult your 680XO reference manual.)


Missing argument
   Directive argument is expected.


Bad argument
Invalid argument
   Legal directive argument is expected.


Directive Error Messages

Illegal character in directive arguments
   Directives must be carefully described. (See the Assembler chapter.)


Equate directive requires a label
   A label must precede all equate directives.
   Example:
      $4000 equ tempvar              ERROR
      tempvar equ $4000              OK
                               Error Messages



Invalid expression for equate directive
Need absolute value here
   An absolute value is a constant expression.
   An absolute value must follow a set directive.
   Examples:
      re:x: equ 1 ;                  OK
      spot equ 2 ;                   OK
      fido equ re:x:+spot            OK
      rover equ re:x:+(a4)           ERROR


Set directive requires a label
   (see: Equate directive requires a label)


Invalid expression for set directive
   (see: Invalid expression for equate directive)


Name already defined
Multiply defined symbol
   Every label must have a unique name.


Register list directive requires a label
Need register list here
REG directive must contain register list
   Register list directives must be specified as follows:
      label         reg
   Macros must be defined as:
      [label]        macro symbol
   The macro name is the label preceding the MACRO directive or the symbol
   following it. Every macro name must be unique.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



Macro end out of place
   The ENDM directive must be used in conjunction with the MACRO direc-
   tive. All directives and opcodes must be preceded by at least one space or
   tab.


Need symbol for definition check
Requires two strings
Right side of test must match left side
Illegal character in conditional
Premature end of line in conditional string
   These errors pertain to conditional directives.


Conditional end directive out of place
   endc must be used in conjunction with an if directive.


Need file name here
Unable to open include file
   Include directives must be specified as:
      include <filename>
      include "filename"


Need 'code' or 'data' here
   The near and far directives must specify 'code' or 'data'
   Examples:
      near code
      far data


Need second argument as well
   The cnop directive requires two arguments.
                               Error


Invalid expression for defined storage
   The value of the size field in the ds directive must be an absolute expression.


Unimplemented assembler directive
   The assembler does not understand. Check your syntax.


Syntax Errors

bad ' ('
Missing ')'; Where's the ')'; Missing trailing paren-
thesis;
Missing ']'; illegal ']';
illegal ' ['
bad syntax
extra characters on line!
Unknown token in expression
Unknown opcode or directive
Illegal character in string
Bad character in line
   Please check your typing.



Linker Error Messages
   This section discusses the error messages that the linker may display as it
   creates an executable program. Below is a summary of the error messages,
   followed by a more detailed explanation of each.

          Note: Only one file type option is permitted.
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



Explanation of Linker Error Messages
  When started, the linker first displays a message on the screen that indicates
  that the linker is loaded and running. If everything goes well, the linker
  prints several messages on the screen listing the sizes of the program
  segments; then the linker finishes. The linker may encounter an error while
  it is running, in which case it sends a message to the screen.
  Errors are reported at a variety of points during the linking process. In
  generates an executable program in two stages, known as pass 1 and pass
  2. The size messages are printed at the end of pass 1, so any errors occurring
  after that are detected during pass 2 of the linker.
  Following is a list of the messages that the linker generates in response to
  an error. The messages are grouped according to the source of the errors
  that cause them. Elements that are variable are enclosed by angled brackets.

Command Line Errors

Unknown option 'e'
   You have used an option letter(c) that the linker does not recognize. The
   linker ignores only the letter; it preserves everything else on the command
   line and the linker tries to execute what it can interpret. See the Linker
   chapter for a list of options that are supported.


Too few arguments in command line
   Several of the linker options have an associated value or name, such as -b
   2000. If a needed value is missing, the linker displays this message and dies.


No input given!

   The linker quits immediately if it is not given any input to process.
                               Error



Cannot have nested -f options.
   At the command line level any number of command files can be specified
   by using the -£ option. However, none of these files can contain the -f option.
   A command file cannot invoke another command file


Too few arguments in -f file:              filename
   An option letter specified in the file, filename, requires a value or name to
   follow it. If an option appears at the end of the file, its associated value may
   not appear back on the command line.


Multiple entry points defined.
   Multiple global symbols have been found that have the same name.


Invalid overlay number
   Overlays must be positive integers.



1/0 Errors

Cannot open filename, err = errno
   If any file in the command line cannot be opened, this message is sent to
   the screen, specifying the filename and the current value of errno.


Cannot open -f file:          filename
   A file given with option -£ cannot be opened.


I/O error (errno) reading/writing output file
   An error reading or wri ting the output file probably means there is no more
   disk space available. In particular, a block of the output file was written to
                            Aztec C Reference Manual



   disk and then could not be read back. The current value of erma is given in
   these messages.


Cannot write output file
Cannot create output file:           filename
   This message usually indicates that all available directory space on the disk
   has been exhausted.


Cannot create symbol table output
Error creating .map file
Cannot create debugger symbol file filename
Error creating symbol listing file
   Option -t is given in the command line, but the file containing the linkage
   symbol table cannot be written to disk. It is possible that there is no more
   space on the disk.


Corrupted object files
Object file is bad!
   This is the most explicit indication that an object file in the linkage is
   corrupted. Recompile and assemble the source file. A bad object file will not
   be discovered until the second pass of the linker.


Invalid operator in evaluate hex_value
   Unless you changed the object code by hand, the file is corrupted.


Library format is invalid!
   A library in the linkage has been corrupted.
                               Error Messages


Cannot read module from input on pass2
... or cannot find symbol, symbol name, on pass two
   Either message indicates that a module is corrupted between pass 1 and
   pass 2. On a multiuser system, it is possible that another user changed the
   file while the linker was running. Otherwise, the error is probably due to a
   hard ware failure.


Not an object file
   A file given to the linker does not contain relocatable object code that In can
   process. For instance, a source file may have been included in the link.


Bad symbol typing information
Line displacement too large
Symbol name too long
   Source-level debugging information is in error. Make sure you have a
   current version of the linker and the compiler.

Errors in Use of Memory

Insufficient memory!
   The linkage process needs memory space for In and global and local symbol
   tables, and approximately 5K for buffers. Just as with compilation, most
   memory use is devoted to the program software and symbol tables. Since
   In is not especially large, only an extremely complicated linkage might run
   out of memory.


TOO many symbols!

   This is another way of saying that not enough memory is available for the
   symbol tables needed for the linkage.
                           Aztec C Reference Manual



Errors Arising From Source Code

Undefined symbol: symbol_name
   A global symbol name remained undefined. This is commonly a function
   that has been referenced in the source code but not included anywhere in
   the linle


symbol_name     multiply defined
   A global symbol is defined more than once. For instance, if two functions
   are accidentally given the same name, this message is generated.


passl (hex_value) and pass2 (hex_value) values differ:
or symbol type differs on pass two: symbol_name
   Either of these errors may be generated during pass 2 when error 24
   appeared in pass 1. They may be considered a confirmation of what was
   discovered in pass 1 of the linker.


Branch out of range @pc=<addr>
   A branch or jump instruction has a target address that is beyond its range.
   This error should not be generated from C programs.


Short branch to next location @pc=addr
   The 68k processor does not accept instructions of this type. This error
   should not occur, since the Manx assembler detects such instructions and
   removes them from the object code.
                               Error



Entry point must be in root segment
   The entry point for a program must be in the program root segment. For
   example, this error would be generated if you tried to link the "hello, world"
   program with the command:
      In hello.o +0 -lc


Entry point must be in first 64K of program
   Not only must a program's entry point be in the root segment, it must also
   be in the first 64k bytes of this segment. The reason for this is that a 16-bit
   field in the jump table points to the entry point.


Attempt to store out of bounds
   This error should not occur. It indicates a linker bug.


Program is too large to link
   This error should not occur. It indicates a linker bug.


Attempt to perform relocation in overlay code
   The only segments of a program that can contain addresses that must be
   relocated when the program is loaded are the program root code segment
   and its initialized data segment. The relocation of these two segments is
   performed when the program is first loaded, by the Manx-supplied startup
   code.


data ref to overlay code not in jump table
   This error is caused by C programs that attempt to initialize a global pointer
   to a static function, where the function is contained in an overlay. Such
   initialization is permitted when the function is located in the root segment,
   but not when it is in another segment.
                           Aztec C Reference Manual


BigCrtO.o must be in root segment
   Attempt to link large data or large segments without appropriate starting
   code. Place BigCrtO .0 early in your In command.


Abso1ute reference from segment to segment
   Segments may only reference other segments via the jump table. Check
   your assembler code, the compiler will never generate these.


Excess number of segments
   Linker internal overflow. Try using fewer and larger segments.


Can't do re1ocation from data to nonroot code
   The only permissible data references are via the jump table. Therefore data
   can only be assigned the address of a function's entry point.


data reference out of range-remake with 1arge data mode1
   Initialized data plus uninitialized data exceeds 32K. Recompile all C source
   modules with -md, reassemble assembly modules with -d, and relink with
   cld.lib (large data). An alternative approach would be to dynamically
   allocate some of your data at run time.
                                               Index

    #asm/ #endasm
         See embedded assembly
    #include files
         pre-compiled, 2-6 - 2-7
          search order,2-6
          searching for, 2-5
    #pragmas
         Seepragmas
    * operand as argument to print, db, 7-35
    .dbg file, 5-16
    .dbinit file, db, 7-7
    == command, db, 7-43
    ?command,db,744
    @function,db, 7-12
    _FILE---, 3-13
    _FUNC---, 3-13
    _LINE---, 3-13
    _INT32,3-14
    _LARGE_CODE,2-26,3-14
    _LARGE_DATA, 2-26,3-14

A
    abnonnal tennination of program, db, 7-4
    accessing variables
         from C and assembly, 8-14
    add command, db, 7-14
    ADDR
         definition, 7-11
         examples, 7-13
    addressing, db commands, 7-15
    adi command, db, 7-14
    adl command, db, 7-14
    adp command, db, 7-14
    adr command, db, 7-14
    adump utility, 6-3
aggregate types
     arrays, 3-10
     structures, 3-10
ai command, db, 7-15,7-32
ak command, db, 7-15
al command, db, 7-16
am cornrnand, db, 7-17
amicall
     See pragrnas
Amiga ROM Kemal Manual, 8-18
Amiga specific commands, db, 7-14
an command, db, 7-17
ANSI language specifications, 3-1
      examples, 3-8
      auto aggregate initialization, 3-10
      extended syntax, 3-7
      features supported, 3-6
      function prototypes, 3-6
      K&R versus ANSI, 3-7
      overview, 1-1, 2-36
      predefined symbols, 3-13
      See also prototypes
      size_t,3-13
      sizeof and size_t, 3-13
      trigraphs, 3-11
      wide strings and literals, 3-10
ANSI preprocessor features
      line continuation, 3-15
      predefined symbols, 3-13 - 3-14
      string concatenation, 3-15
ap command, db, 7-17
aq command, db, 7-18
arcommand, db, 7-19
arcv utility, 6-2
array, initialization, 3-10
as command, db, 7-19
assembler
      definition, 4-1
      syntax, 4-2
      accessing modules, 8-12




                                   ii
     arguments to subroutines, 4-21
     embedded with C, 2-44, 4-21 - 4-22
     See also embedded assembly
     executable instructions, 4-8
     execution environment, 4-2
     file creation, 2-4
     functions callable from C, 8-12 - 8-16
     INCLUDE environment variable, 4-4
     include files, 4-4 - 4-5
     input file, 4-2
     listing file, 4-3
     memory models, 4-5
     object code file, 4-3
     operating instructions, 4-2
     optimizations, 4-3 - 4-4
     output control, 2-15
     processor support, 4-2
     register conventions, 4-21
     searching for include files, 4-4
     source program structure, 4-8 - 4-14, 4-16,4-18 - 4-20
     source statements, 4-1
     using with C source code, 2-44 - 2-45, 8-12,8-15
assembler directives, 4-10,4-12 - 4-14,4-16,4-18 - 4-20
     blanks, 4-10
     bss, 4-16
     dist, 4-10
     cnop, 4-11
     cseg, 4-11
     dc - define constant, 4-12
     dcb - define constant block, 4-12
     ds - define storage, 4-13
     dseg, 4-11
     else, 4-15
     end,4-13
     endc, 4-15
     endm, 4-17 - 4-18
     entry, 4-13
     equ, 4-13
     equr, 4-14
     even,4-14




                                 iii
    fail, 4-14
    far code, 4-14
    far data, 4-14
    freg,4-14
    global, 4-16
    if, 4-15
     ifc,4-15
     ifd,4-15
     ifnc,4-15
     ifnd,4-15
     include, 4-16
     list, 4-17
     machine, 4-17
     macro, 4-17 - 4-18
     mc68851,4-18
     mc68881,4-18
     mexit,4-18
     mlist,4-17
     near code, 4-16
     near data, 4-16
     noclist,4-10
     nolist,4-17
     nomlist, 4-17
     other ifs, 4-16
     public, 4-19
     reg, 4-19
     section, 4-19
     set, 4-19 - 4-20
     ttl, 4-20
     xdef,4-20
     xref,4-20
assembler error messages
     opcode summary list, 9-7 - 9-9
     explanations, directive errors, 9-66 - 9-69
     explanations, opcode errors, 9-62 - 9-66
     explanations, syntax errors, 9-69
assembler options
      summary list, 4-6
      -c,4-5,4-7
      -d, 4-5, 4-7




                                  iv
         -i, 4-4 - 4-5, 4-7
         -1,4-3,4-7
         -n,4-3
         -0,4-7
            -0 example, 4-3
    at command, db, 7-19
    auto aggregate initialization, 3-10
    available memory
          segmentation, 8-8

B
    backtracing, db, 7-6
    bb command, db, 7-20
    be command, db, 7-21
    bd command, db, 7-21
    bh command, db, 7-22
    bitfields, 3-5
    bl command, db, 7-20
    bq command, db, 7-22
    br command, db, 7-23
    branches
          optimizations, 4-3
    breakpoints, db, 7-4
          commands, 7-5
           skip count, 7-4
    bs command, db, 7-23
    bt command, db, 7-24
    bu command, db, 7-24
    bw command, db, 7-20

c
    C and assembly
           accessing variables, 8-14
           stack operations, 8-13
    c.lib,8-11
    CCOPTS environment variable
           See environment variables
    char type, 3-4
    characters




                                          v
      long constant, 3-12
      non-alphanumeric, 3-11
      wide, 3-10
chip or processor control, 2-15
clear commands, db, 7-25
cmdlist, definition, 7-14
cmp utility, 6-4
cnm utility, 6-5 - 6-9
      options, 6-6
      symbol format, 6-7
      symbol ~s,6-7
      type codes, 6-7 - 6-9
code segmentation, 2-14
code segments, 8-2
      location in memory, 8-3
      size, 8-4
command breakpoints, db, 7-5
command line errors
      See linker error messages
command summary, db
      See db commands
compatibility, 3-1
      Amiga Workbench, 3-1
      UNIX,3-1
       with other Aztec compilers, 3-1
      XENIX,3-1
compiler
      See also libraries
      _LARGE_CODE, defining, 2-26
      _LARGE_DATA, defining, 2-26
      aborting, 2-2
       code segment limits, 2-14
       converting data, 2-43
       declared functions, 2-41 - 2-42
      displaying error messages, 2-34
      embedded assembly, 2-44
        example, 2-44
      enums, 2-27
      error handling, 2-34
      fatal errors, 2-34




                                  vi
    for loops, 2-29
    handling errors, 2-34
    input files, 2-2
    internal storage of numeric data,2-43
    invoking, 2-1
    line continuation, 2-44
    memory models, 2-8 - 2-14
    mixing memory models,2-13
    See also memory models
    nonfatal errors, 2-34
    output files, assembly language, 2-4
    output files, object code, 2-3
    pointer considerations, 2-41
    pointer use, rules, 2-41
    See also pointers
    pre-compiled #inc1ude files, 2-6 - 2-7
    predefined symbols, 3-14
    prepended underscore use in db, 7-3
    prototypes, 2-28
    searching for #inc1ude files, 2-5
    selecting a memory model, 2-12
    syntax, 2-1
    table manipulation options, description, 2-34
    trigraph option, 3-12
    trigraphs, 2-28
    utility options - description, 2-23
compiler error messages
    summary list, 9-2 - 9-6
    fatal error summary list, 9-7
    explanations, 9-12 - 9-57
    explanations, fatal errors, 9-58 - 9-62
    explanations, internal errors, 9-62
compiler options, 2-14
    summary list, 2-17 - 2-20
    -3 option, 2-17, 2-21 - 2-22
    -5 option, 2-17, 2-21 - 2-22
    -a option, 2-2, 2-4 - 2-5, 2-17
      -a examples, 2-4
    -at option,2-4 - 2-5, 2-17
    -bd option, 2-17




                                vii
-bs option, 2-17,5-16
-e2 option, 2-17, 2-22
-d option, 2-17, 2-22 - 2-23
-e option, 2-21
-f8 option, 2-17, 2-24
-fa option, 2-17,2-23
-ff option, 2-17, 2-23
-fm option, 2-17, 2-24
-hi option, 2-7, 2-17, 2-24
  -hi examples, 2-7
-ho option, 2-7, 2-17,2-24
   -ho examples, 2-7
-i option, 2-5, 2-17, 2-25
-k option, 2-17, 2-21, 2-25
-rna option, 2-17
-mb option, 2-18,2-26
-me option, 2-12 - 2-13,2-18,2-26
-md option, 2-12 - 2-13, 2-18, 2-26
-me option, 2-18
-mm option, 2-18,2-26
-ms option, 2-18
-0 option, 2-18, 2-27
-pa option, 2-18, 2-27
   -pa examples, 2-15
-pb option, 2-18,2-27
-pc option, 2-18
-pe option, 2-18, 2-27
-pI option, 2-18, 2-27
-po option, 2-18
-pp option, 2-18
-ps option, 2-18, 2-28, 2-41
   -ps examples, 2-15
-pt option, 2-18, 2-28
-pu option, 2-18 - 2-19
-qa option, 2-19, 2-28
-qf option, 2-1, 2-19,2-29
-qp option, 2-19,2-29
-qq option, 2-19,2-29
-qs option, 2-19, 2-29
-qv option, 2-19,2-29




                            viii
         -r4 option, 2-19
         -sa option, 2-19
         -sb option, 2-19
         -sf option, 2-19, 2-29
         -smoption, 2-19
         -sn option, 2-19, 2-30
         -so option, 2-19
         -sp option, 2-19, 2-30
         -sr option, 2-19, 2-30
         -ss option, 2-20, 2-30
         -su option, 2-20, 2-31
         -wa option, 2-20, 2-31
         -wd option, 2-20, 2-31
         -we option, 2-20
         -wI option, 2-20, 2-32
         -wn option, 2-20, 2-32
         -wo option, 2-20, 2-32
         -wp option, 2-20, 2-32
         -wq option, 2-20, 2-33
         -wr option, 2-20, 2-33
         -ws option, 2-20
         -wu option, 2-20, 2-33
         -ww option, 2-20, 2-34
         -z option, 2-21
    compiler options, turning off, 2-15
    const, 3-5
    constant
         definition, 7-10
    continuation, line, 3-15
    cs command, db, 7-25
    current directory
         loading db files from, 7-4

D
    d command, db, 7-26
    data segments
          location in memory, 8-4
          size limitations, 8-4
    data types, 3-2
          bitfields, 3-5




                                      ix
        example, 3-5
      characters, 3-4
        example, 3-4
      const, 3-5
      enums,3-5
      integers and long integers, 3-3
        example, 3-3
      structures, 3-4
        example, 3-4
      volatile, 3-5
data, converting, 2-43
db
      See also db terms
      .dbinit file, 7-7
      @function, 7-12
      abnormal termination of program, 7-4
      addressing commands, 7-15
      Amiga specific commands, 7-14
      backtracing, 7-6
      basic commands, 7-2
      breakpoint skip count, 7-4
      breakpoints, 7-4 - 7-5
      code symbols, 7-3
      command format, 7-2
      command vs table breakpoints, 7-5
      compiler prepended underscore, 7-3
      creating macros, 7-6
      data symbols, 7-3
      default radix setting, 7-10
      defining breakpoints, 7-4
      desc_code list, print option, 7-37
      display code and data symbols, 7-3
      entering a function, 7-6
      environment variables, 7-7
      examining memory, 7-2
      examining variables, 7-4
      exiting, 7-39
      exiting a function, 7-6
      loading programs, 7-3
      loading programs not in current directory, 7-4




                                  x
     loading symbols, 7-4
     macros, 7-6
     memory change breakpoints, 7-5
     modifying memory, 7-2
     overlay breakpoints, 7-8
     print command * operand, 7-35
     print command format string, 7-33
     print count specifier, 7-33
     print desc_code, 7-33
     program control, 7-4
     program termination, 7-4, 7-8
     referencing symbols by location, 7-3
     referencing symbols by name, 7-3
     removing memory breakpoints, 7-6
     requirements, 7-1
     scatter loading support, 7-8
     segment loading and unloading, 7-9
     setting memory breakpoints, 7-6
     single-stepping, 7-2
     skip counter, 7-5
     special characters, 7-11
     starting db, 7-3, 7-7
     startup events, 7-7
     stopping display, 7-9
     stopping the program, 7-9
     symbol table generated by linker, 7-3
     symbol table hunks, 7-3
     trace mode, 7-6
     unassembly, 7-2
     viewing code and data symbols, 7-3
db command,db, 7-26
db commands
     summary list, 7-45
         Special character commands, 7-43
     < - redirect input, 7-43
     == - display expression, 7-43
     > -log output to file, 7-43
     » -log commands only, 7-43
     ? - help, 7-2,7-7,7-12,7-44
         Amiga specific commands, 7-15




                                xi
add - display device list, 7-14
adi - display interrupt list, 7-14
adl - display library list, 7-14
adp - display port list, 7-14
adr - display resource list, 7-14
ai - display task info, 7-15, 7-32
ak - kill current task, 7-15
all aL - debug next task w / 0 symbols, 7-16
am - amtof free memory in system, 7-17
an/aN - new window and symbols, 7-17
ap/aP - debug a crashed program, 7-17
aq - close all windows, 7-18
ar - allow current task to resume, 7-19
as / as - select a task to debug, 7-19
at - display all tasks, 7-19
     Breakpoint commands, 7-2
bb - set byte breakpoint, 7-20
be/bC - clear breakpoint, 7-21
bd - display breakpoints, 7-21
bh - set memory hash breakpoint, 7-22
bl- set long breakpoint, 7-20
bq - toggle low memory checksum, 7-22
br - reset breakpoint counter, 7-23
bs - set or modify a breakpoint, 7-23
bt/bT - toggle trace mode flag, 7-24
bu - user defined breakpoint, 7-24
bw - set word breakpoint, 7-20
    Clear symbol table commands, 7-25
cs - clear symbol table, 7-3, 7-25
    Display commands, 7-26
d - display memory in last format, 7-26
db - display bytes in memory, 7-26
dc - display all code symbols, 7-26
dd - display data symbols, 7-27
dg - display global values, 7-27
dl- display memory in longs, 7-26
ds - display stack backtrace, 7-27
dw - display memory in words, 7-26
    Memory commands, 7-29
rna - allocate some memory, 7-29




                            xii
      mb - modify bytes of memory, 7-30
      mc - compare memory, 7-30
      mf - fill memory, 7-31
      ml- modify double words of memory, 7-30
      mm - move memory, 7-31
      ms - search memory, 7-31
      mw - modify words of memory, 7-30
         Miscellaneous commands, 7-28 -7-29
      n - change radix, 7-32
      giG - execute the program, 7-28, 7-32, 7-34 - 7-42
db terms
      addr, 7-13
      addr and *addr, 7-11
      cmdlist, 7-14
      constant, 7-10
      expr, 7-9
      period,7-12
      range, 7-13
      registers, 7-10
      term, 7-9
dc command, db, 7-26
dd command, db, 7-27
debugging control, 2-15
declared functions, 2-41 - 2-42
default radix setting, db, 7-10
default settings, 2-14
defining breakpoints, db, 7-4
desc30de list, db, 7-37
device drivers, 5-1
dg command, db, 7-27
directive error messages
      See assembler error messages
directives, assembler
      See assembler directives
display task information, db, 7-15
dl command, db, 7-26
ds command, db, 7-27
du utility, 6-10
dw command, db, 7-26




                                 xiii
E
    embedded assembler
         example~2-44,8-12
          source, 8-15
    enums, 2-27,3-5
    environment variables
          See also specific variable name
          CCOPTS, 2-14 - 2-16, 2-21 - 2-22
          CCfEMP,2-4
          CLlB, 5-4, 5-11
          db,7-7
          displaying, 6-28
          INCLUDE, 2-5 - 2-6, 4-4 - 4-5
          setting, 6-28
    error handling, compiler, 2-34
    error messages, assembler
          See assembler error messages
    error messages, compiler
          See compiler error messages
    error messages, linker
          See linker error messages
    escape sequences, 3-12
    examining variables, db, 7-4
    executable file, 5-4, 5-8
    executable instructions
          assembler, 4-8 - 4-10
          labels, 4-8
          operands, 4-9 - 4-10
          operations, 4-8 - 4-9
    executable programs, 5-1, 5-7
    execution environment
          assembler, 4-2
    exiting a function, db, 7-6
    exiting db, 7-39
    EXPR, definition, 7-9
    extern keyword
          use with global variables, 8-15
    external functions, 8-12




                                     xiv
F
    floating point control, 2-15
    floating point support, 8-18
          compile requirements, 8-19
          compiler options, 2-23
          descriptions of, 8-19
          formats, 8-19
          link requirements, 8-19
          register usage, 8-13
    function
          K&R versus ANSI, 3-7
          structure arguments, 3-11
    function calls, 8-13
    function calls and returns, 8-13
    function definition, 3-7
    function entering, db, 7-6
    function prototypes, 3-9
          See prototypes
    functions.h, 2-37 - 2-38

G
    g command, db, 7-28
    geta4 function, 8-18
    global data, 8-9
    global variables, 8-14

H
    hd utility, 6-11
    heap segments, 8-3
         size of, 8-4
    help command, db, 7-7
    hunk data, 5-14, 8-6 - 8-8


    I/O errors
         See linker error messages
    INCLUDE environment variable
         See environment variables
    include files




                                       xv
          -i option, 4-4
          environment variable, 4-5
          search order, 4-5
          searching for, 4-4
    initialized data, 8-2, 8-4
    input files, 2-2, 5-8
          assembler, 4-2
          source filename extensions, 2-2 - 2-3
    interrupt handlers
          examples, 8-17
          compile options, 8-17
          defined, 8-16
          inCend,8-17
          inCstart, 8-17
          preserving registers, 8-16 - 8-17
    interrupt service routines, 8-16

J
    jsr optimizations, 4-4
    jump table, segmentation, 8-6

K
    keywords
        list, 3-2
        extern, 8-15

L
    Language specs
        See also data types
        See also ANSI preprocessor features
        ANSI syntax, 3-7
        data type list, 3-3
        escape sequences, 3-12
        keywords list, 3-2
        long character constants, 3-12
        operator list, 3-2
        preprocessor directive list, 3-2
        register variables, 3-13
        structure assignment, 3-11




                                      xvi
       structure passing, 3-11
       symbol names, 3-13
LARGE CODE, 3-14
LARGE DATA, 3-14
lb utility, 5-3, 6-12 - 6-22
       adding modules, 6-18 - 6-19
       advanced features, 6-17
       basic features, 6-14
       creating a library, 6-14
       default extension, defining, 6-22
       deleting modules, 6-19 - 6-20
       extracting modules, 6-21
       function code options, 6-12
       getting arguments from a file, 6-16
       library argument, 6-12
       mod arguments, 6-13
       moving modules, 6-19
       naming modules, 6-15
       options argument, 6-12
       ord,6-27
       qualifier options, 6-13
       reading arguments from a file, 6-13
       rebuilding a library, 6-22
       replacing modules, 6-20
libraries, 2-12, 2-35, 5-3, 5-9 - 5-10,8-10
       examples, 5-5 - 5-6, 8-11
       adding modules, 6-18 - 6-19
       c.lib, 5-9, 8-10
       creating, 6-14
       deleting modules, 6-19 - 6-20
       extracting modules, 6-21
       Ib utility, 6-17 - 6-22
       m.lib,5-9
       moving modules, 6-19
       naming conventions, 8-11
       order of modules, 5-5 - 5-7, 6-15
       rebuilding, 6-22
       replacing modules, 6-20
line continuation, 2-44
linker




                                  xvii
      examples, 5-3 - 5-4, 5-8, 5-10
     See also environment variables
      CLI programs, 5-1
      CLIB environment variable, 5-4, 5-11
      device drivers, 5-1
      executable file, 5-8
      executable programs, 5-1
      generates db symbol table, 7-3
      hunk data, 5-14
      input files, 5-8
      introduction, 5-2
      libraries, 5-3, 5-5, 5-9 - 5-10
      relocatable object format, 5-1
      starting, 5-7
      syntax, 5-7
      the process, 5-2 - 5-4
      use, 5-7 - 5-8, 5-10
      workbench programs, 5-1
linker error messages, 9-10
      command line summary list, 9-10 - 9-11
     explanations, command line errors, 9-70 - 9-71
      explanations, I/O errors, 9-71 - 9-73
      explanations, memory errors, 9-73
      explanations, source code errors, 9-74 - 9-76
linker options, 8-3
      +a long word boundaries, 5-10
      +c chip memory, 5-15, 8-3
      +f fast memory load, 5-10, 5-15,8-3
      +1,5-10
      +0,5-11
      +s val, 5-11
      -a, 4-11
      -f, 5-10,5-12,8-10
      -g source level debug, 5-10, 5-16
      -1 name, 5-10 - 5-11, 8-10
      -m,5-1O
      -0,5-8,5-11,8-10
      -q,5-11
      -t,5-11
      -v, 5-11




                               xviii
           -w,5-11
    listing file, assembler, 4-3
    literals, wide, 3-10
    loading programs, db, 7-3
    loading symbols, db, 7-4
    long character constant, 3-12
    Is command, db, 7-29
    Is utility, 6-23

M
    m.lib,8-11
    m8.lib,8-11
    rna command, db, 7-29
    ma.lib,8-11
    macro calls
          definition, 4-20
    macros
          creating in db, 7-6
    mb command, db, 7-30
    me command, db, 7-30
    memory change breakpoints, db, 7-5
    memory errors
          See linker error messages
    memory models, 2-8 - 2-14
          assembler, large code, 4-5, 4-7
          assembler, large data, 4-5, 4-7
          code segmentation, 2-14, 8-4
          control of, 2-15
          large code vs small code, 2-9 - 2-11
          large data vs small data, 2-8 - 2-9
          libraries, 2-12
          multimodule programs, 2-13
          selection for use by a module, 2-12
          using the correct libraries, 8-11
    mf command, db, 7-31
    mf.lib,8-11
    mkarcv utility, 6-25
    ml command, db, 7-30
    mm command, db, 7-31
    movem




                                      xix
          optimizations, 4-4
          reg directive, 4-19
    rns command, db, 7-31
    multi-tasking, 8-17
          examples, 8-18
          use of a4 register, 8-18
    multimodule programs, 2-13
    mw command, db, 7-30

N
    n command, db, 7-32
    naming conventions
         C and assembly, 8-12
    numbering segments, 8-9
    numeric data
         internal storage, 2-43

o
    obd utility, 6-26
    object code file
         assembler, 4-3
         creation, 2-3 - 2-4
    object modules, 8-11
    opcode error messages
         See assembler error messages
    operating instructions
         assembler, 4-2
    operator list, 3-2
    optimizations
         assembler, 4-3 - 4-4
         branches, 4-3
         control, 2-15
         jsr,4-4
         movem,4-4
         volatile, 3-5
    ord utility, 5-6, 6-27
    output control, 2-15
    output files, 2-3 - 2-4
    overlay breakpoints, db, 7-8




                                     xx
p
    p command, db
         See print command, db
    parser control, 2-15
    pointer considerations, 2-41
    pointers
         declare function arguments that are pointers, 2-42
         declare functions that return pointers, 2-41
         variables and constants as arguments, 2-42
    portability, 3-1
         integers, 3-3
    pragmas
         definition, 2-36
         a6 register, 2-36
         amicall, 2-36 - 2-40
         Amiga exec calls, 2-35
         calling resident libraries, 2-36 - 2-38
         creating resident libraries, 2-38 - 2-39
         libcall,2-40
         regcall, 2-40
          register function calls, 2-39
          syscall, 2-40
    pre-defined symbols, 3-13
    precompiled #include files, 2-6
    predefined symbols
         _FILE-,3-14
         _FUNC-, 3-14
         _LINE-, 3-14
          _INT32,3-14
         _LARGE_CODE, 3-14
          _LARGE_DATA, 3-14
          AZTEC_C,3-14
         MCH_AMIGA,3-14
         MPU68000,3-14
          VERSION, 3-14
    preprocessor
         concatenation, 3-15
         directives, 3-2
         features, 3-13
    preserving registers, 8-15




                                    xxi
          See registers
    print command, db, 7-2
          examples, 7-35 - 7-38
          count specifier, 7-33
          desc_codes, 7-33, 7-38
          fonnat items, 7-33
          fonnat string, 7-33
          indir,7-34
          rpt parameter, 7-35
    processor support
          assembler, 4-2
    program control, db, 7-4
    program organization, 8-2
    program termination, db, 7-4, 7-8
    prototypes, 2-28
          function call, 3-7
          function declarations, 3-6, 3-9
          function definition, 3-7

Q
    q command, db, 7-39
    QuikFix, 2-1- 2-2, 2-19, 2-29, 2-34

R
    r command, db, 7-40
    RAM, 2-36
    range
          definition, 7-13
    register conventions
          assembler, 4-21
    registers
          a4, 2-13, 2-26,8-17
          as, 2-30
          a6,2-36
          control of, 2-15
          definition, 7-10
          floating point, 4-14
          preserving, 8-15 - 8-17
          reg directive, 4-19




                                      xxii
          restoring, 4-22
          stack pointer, 4-21
          usage, 8-15
          variables, 3-13
    relocatable object format, 5-1
    requirements, db, 7-1
    reselecting segments, 8-10
    resident library
          example, 2-39
          Amiga functions, 2-37
          calling, 2-36 - 2-37
          creating, 2-38
    ROM,2-36
    ROM applications
          suppressing dseg generation, 2-26
    root segment
          startup code, 8-7

s
    s command, db, 7-40
    s.lib,8-11
    scatter loading support, db, 7-8
    segment loading and unloading, db, 7-9
    segmentation, 8-5
           examples, 8-9 - 8-10
           creating segments, 8-8
           function exclusivity, 8-5
           global data, 8-9
           hunk data, 8-6, 8-8
           jump table, 8-6
           linker requirements, 8-9
           linking startup code, 8-7
           loading segments, 8-5
           maximum number of segments, 8-9
           memory usage, 8-8
           numbering segments, 8-9
           program design, 8-5
           reselecting segments, 8-10
           segload, 8-6
           segment construction, 8-7




                                   xxiii
      segment data table, 8-8
      segment size, 8-4
      segment size limits, 8-4
      segmented code, 8-5, 8-8
      segments, 8-2 - 8-3
      static data, 8-9
      unloading segments, 8-6
set utility, 6-28
setdate utility, 6-29
setting and removing memory change breakpoints, db, 7-6
size types, 3-3
size_t, 3-13
sizeof, 3-4, 3-13
skip counter, db, 7-5
source code errors
      See linker error messages
source filename extensions, 2-2 - 2-3
source program structure
      comments, 4-8
      executable instructions, 4-8
special characters, db, 7-11
stack segments, 8-3
      C and assembly, 8-13
      CLI default value, 8-4
      function calls, 8-13
      stack size, 8-4
starting, db, 7-7
startup code, 8-7
      linking, 8-7
      location, 8-7
      root segment requirements, 8-7
static data, 8-9
stopping display, db, 7-9
stopping program execution, db, 7-9
string concatenation, 3-15
strings
       long, 3-15
       wide, 3-10
structure
       alignment, 3-4




                              xxiv
         initialization, 3-10
    subroutines, arguments to
         floating point, 4-21
         returning from a C function, 4-22
         variable names, 4-21
    subtasks, creating, 8-17
         example, 8-18
    symbol names, 3-13
    symbol table hunks, db, 7-3
    syntax error messages
         See assembler error messages

T
    table breakpoints, db, 7-5
    tables, 2-34
    TERM, definition, 7-10
    termination of program, db, 7-4
    toggle, 2-14
    trace mode, db, 7-6
    trigraphs, 2-28, 3-11
    turning off compiler options, 2-15

u
    u command, db, 7-41
    underscore
            referencing symbols in db, 7-3
    uninitialized data, 8-3 - 8-4
    UNIX compatibility, 3-1
    unsigned characters, 3-4
    utilities:
           adump - Amiga object module dump, 6-3
           arcv - text file archiver, 6-2
           cmp - file comparison, 6-4
           cnm - display file info, 6-5 - 6-9
           du - disk usage, 6-10
           hd - hex dump, 6-11
           Ib - object file librarian, 6-12 - 6-22
           Is -list files and directories, 6-23
           rnkarcv - text file archiver, 6-25




                                    xxv
         obd - list object code, 6-26
         ord - sort object module, 6-27
         set - set environment variable, 6-28
         setdate - set date and time, 6-29

v
    v command, db, 7-42
    variables, 8-3
    volatile, 3-5

w
    warning control, 2-15
    wide literals, 3-10
    wide strings, 3-10
    workbench,8-19
         examples, 8-21
         creating programs, 8-19 - 8-22
         starting up, 8-21

x
    x command, db, 7-42
    XENIX compatibility, 3-1




                                    xxvi
  Aztec C Library Manual
          for the
           Amiga

                    Version 5.0
                   October 1989




Copyright © 1988, 1989 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.
                 All Rights Reserved
                     Worldwide

                  PUBLISHED BY:

               Manx Software Systems
                    P.O. Box 55
               Shrewsbury, NJ 07702
                  (201) 542-2121
USE RESTRICTIONS
  You are pennitted to install and use this product on a single computer.
  Multiple CPU systems require supplementary licenses.
  Before using any Aztec C products, the License Registration included with
  this product must be signed and mailed to:

                           Manx Software Systems
                                P.O. Box 55
                           Shrewsbury, NJ 07702

COPYRIGHT
  This software package and document are copyrighted © 1988,1989 by Manx
  Software Systems. All rights reserved worldwide.
  No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, transcribed,
  stored in any retrieval system, or translated into any language without prior
  written pennission of Manx Software Systems.

DISCLAIMER
  Manx Software Systems makes no representations or warranties with
  respect to this product and specifically disclaims any implied warranties of
  merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose. Manx Software Sys-
  tems reserves the right to modify the programs and revise the contents of
  the manual without obligation to notify any person of such revision or
  changes.

TRADEMARKS
  Aztec C, Manx AS, Manx LN, Z, and SDB are trademarks of Manx Software
  Systems. CP IM-86 and CP IM-80 are trademarks of Digital Research.
  MSDOS is a trademark of Microsoft. PC DOS is a trademark of IBM. UNIX
  is a trademark of AT&T Bell Laboratories. Macintosh and Apple II are
  trademarks of Apple Computer. Atari is a trademark of Atari Computers.
  Amiga is a trademark of Commodore-Amiga.
Manual Revision History
       October 1989       Fifth Edition
       December 1988      Fourth Edition
       May 1988           Third Edition
       April 1986         Second Edition
       February 1986      First Edition
                                                Table of Contents

Chapter 1 - Introduction
       ANSI C ................................................ 1-1


Chapter 2 - Library Overview
  Introduction ............................................ 2 - 1
  Library Summary ....................................... 2 - 1
    31-Character Names ........................................ 2 - 2
    Integer Sizes ............................................... 2 - 2
  Overview of Aztec C and Amiga 110 ...................... 2 - 3
    Aztec C I/O Functions ............ ' ....... ' ................. 2 - 3
       Preopened Devices and Command Line Arguments ......... 2 - 4
       File I/O ............................................... 2 - 5
       SequentialI/O .................... " .................... 2 - 5
       Random I/O ........................................... 2 - 5
       Opening Files .......................................... 2 - 6
       Device I/O ............................................. 2 - 6
       Console I/O ............................................ 2 - 6
       I/O to Other Devices ................................... 2 - 7
       Mixing Unbuffered and Standard I/O Calls ................. 2 - 7
    AMIGAI/O FUNCTIONS ................................... 2-7
      Preopened Devices and Command Line Arguments ......... 2 - 8
    FILE I/O .................................................. 2 - 8
       Device I/O ............................................. 2 - 8
       Aborting a Program from the Console ...................... 2 - 8
  Overview of Aztec Standard 110       ......................... 2 - 9
    Aztec C Standard I/O Functions ............................. 2 - 9
       Opening Files and Devices ................................ 2 - 9
     Closing Streams ......................................... 2 - 10
     Sequential I/O .......................................... 2- 10
     Random I/O ............................................ 2 -10
     Buffering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ............. 2 - 11
     Errors .................................................. 2-11
  THE STANDARD I/O FUNCTIONS .......................... 2-12
  AMIGA STANDARD I/O ................................... 2 -14
    Buffering ............................................. 2-14
Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Unbuffered I/O ........... 2 -14
  FILE I/O .................................................. 2 - 16
  DEVICE I/O ............................................... 2-17
    Unbuffered I/O to the Console ............................ 2-17
    Unbuffered I/O to Nonconsole Devices .................... 2-17
Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Console I/O .............. 2 - 17
     Character-Oriented Input ................................. 2- 17
     Writing System-Independent Programs .................... 2 - 18
     Using ioctl .............................................. 2-18
  THE sgtty FIELD ........................................... 2 - 19
  EXAMPLE ................................................. 2 -19
    Console Input - RAW Mode .............................. 2 -19
Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Dynamic
Buffer Allocation ........................................ 2 - 20
     Dynamic Allocation of Standard I/O Buffers ................ 2 - 21
     Overview of Dynamic Buffer Allocation ................... 2 - 21
Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Error Processing .......... 2 - 21
Overview of ANSI Header Files .......................... 2 - 23
     assert.h ................................................. 2 - 23
     ctype.h ................................................. 2 - 24
     errno.h ................................................. 2 - 24
     fcntl.h .................................................. 2 - 24


                                               ii
       float.h .................................................. 2 - 24
       limits.h ................................................. 2 - 24
       locale.h ................................................. 2 - 24
       math.h ................................................. 2 - 24
       setjmp.h ................................................ 2 - 24
       signal.h ................................................ 2 - 24
       stdarg.h ................................................ 2 - 24
       stddef.h ................................................ 2 - 25
       stdio.h ................................................. 2 - 25
       stdlib.h ................................................. 2 - 25
       string.h ................................................. 2 - 25
       time.h .................................................. 2 - 25


Chapter 3 - Library Functions
  Introduction ............................................ 3 - 1
  FUNCTION LIST ....................................... 3 - 2
  DESCRIPTION FORMAT ................................ 3 - 6
    _abort (C) - Miscellaneous ................................... 3 - 9
    abs (C) - Integer Math ....................................... 3- 10
    access (C) - Standard II 0 .................................... 3 - 11
    acos (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3 - 13
    asctime (C) - Time .......... , ....... , ......... , ............ . 3-14
    asin (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3 -15
    assert (Macro) - Miscellaneous ............................... 3 -16
    atan (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3 -17
    atan2 (M) - Float Math ...................................... 3 - 18
    atexit (C) - Miscellaneous .................................... 3- 19



                                     iii
atof (M) - Conversion ....................................... 3 - 20
atoi(C) - Conversion ........................................ 3 - 21
atol (C) - Conversion ........................................ 3 - 22
calloc (C) - Memory Allocation ............................... 3 - 23
ceil (M) - Float Math ........................................ 3 - 24
elearerr (C) - Standard I/O .................................. 3 - 25
_eli_parse (C) - Amiga ...................................... 3 - 26
clock (C) - Time ............................................ 3 - 27
close (C) - UNIX I/O ........................................ 3 - 28
cos (M) - Float Math ........................................ 3 - 29
cosh (M) - Float Math ............................ , .......... 3 - 30
cotan (M) - Float Math ...................................... 3 - 31
creat (C) - UNIX I/O ........................................ 3 - 32
ctime (C) - Time ..... " ............................. , ....... 3 - 33
difftime (C) - Time .......................................... 3 - 34
div (C) - Integer Math ....................................... 3 - 35
dos_packet (C) - Amiga ..................................... 3 - 36
exec (C) - Amiga ........................................... 3 - 37
   Parameters ............................................. 3 - 37
   The Functions ........................................... 3 - 38
   Other Features .......................................... 3 - 38
exit (C) - Miscellaneous ..................................... 3 - 39
exp (M) - Float Math ........... " ........................... 3 - 40
fabs (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3 - 41
fclose (C) - Standard I/O .................................... 3 - 42



                                iv
fdopen (C) - UNIX I/O ...................................... 3 - 43
feof (C) - Standard I/O ...................................... 3 - 46
ferror (C) - Standard I/O .................................... 3 - 47
fexeel, fexecv(C) - Amiga .................................... 3 - 48
   Parameters ............................................. 3 - 48
   The Functions ........................................... 3 - 49
   Other Information ....................................... 3 - 49
fflush (C) - Standard I/O .................................... 3 - 51
fgetc (C) - Standard I/O ..................................... 3 - 52
fgetpos (C) - Standard I/O ................................... 3 - 53
fgets (C) - Standard I/O ..................................... 3 - 54
fileno (C) - UNIX I/O .. , .................................... 3 - 55
floor (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3 - 56
fmod (M) - Float Math ...................................... 3 - 57
fopen (C) - Standard I/O .................................... 3 - 58
format (C) - Conversion ..................................... 3 - 61
fprintf (C, M) - Standard I/O ..... " ................... , ...... 3 - 62
fputc(C) - Standard I/O ...................... , .............. 3 - 63
fputs (C) - Standard I/O ..................................... 3 - 64
fread (C) - Standard I/O ..................................... 3 - 65
free (C) - Memory Allocation ................................. 3 - 66
freeseg (C) - Amiga ......................................... 3 - 67
freopen (C) - Standard I/O .................................. 3 - 68
frexp (M) - Float Math ...................................... 3 - 69
fscanf (C,M) - Standard I/O ................................. 3 - 70



                                 v
fseek (0 - Standard I/O ..................................... 3- 71
fsetpos (0 - Standard I/O ................................... 3-73
ftell (0 - Standard I/O ...................................... 3 - 74
ftoa (M) - Conversion ....................................... 3-75
fwrite (0 - Standard I/O .................................... 3- 76
geta4 (C) - Amiga ........................................... 3 - 78
getc (0 - Standard I/O ...................................... 3 -79
getchar (0 - Standard I/O ................................... 3 - 80
getenv (0 - Miscellaneous ................................... 3 - 81
gets (0 - Standard I/O ...................................... 3 - 82
gmtime (C) - Time .......................................... 3 - 83
index (0 - String Handling .................................. 3 - 84
int_end (0 - Amiga ......................................... 3 - 85
int_start (0 - Amiga ........................................ 3 - 86
ioctl (0 - UNIX I/O ........................................ 3 - 87
is ... (C) - Character Type ..................................... 3 - 88
labs (0 - Integer Math ...................................... 3 - 90
Idexp(M) - Float Math ...................................... 3 - 91
ldiv (C) - Integer Math ...................................... 3 - 92
localtime (0 - Time ......................................... 3 - 93
log (M) - Float Math ........................................ 3 - 94
log10 (M) - Float Math ...................................... 3 - 95
longjmp (0 - Miscellaneous ................................. 3 - 96
lseek (0 - UNIX I/O ........................................ 3 - 97
maUoc (0 - Memory Allocation .............................. 3 - 99


                                vi
memchr (C) - Block Operation ............................... 3 -100
memcmp (C) - Block Operation .............................. 3 -101
memcpy (C) - Block Operation ............................... 3-102
memmove (C) Block Operation .............................. 3 -103
memset (C) - Block Operation ................................ 3-104
mktemp (C) - UNIX I/O ..................................... 3- 105
mktime (C) - Time .......................................... 3-107
modf (M) - Float Math ...................................... 3 -108
movrnem(C) Block Operation ................................ 3-109
open (C) - UNIX I/O ........................................ 3- 110
perror (C) - Standard I/O ...... , .... , ........................ 3-113
pow (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3 - 115
printf (c, M) - Standard I/O ................................. 3 -116
   The Format String ....................................... 3 - 116
   Conversion Specifiers .................................... 3 - 116
   Flags Field .............................................. 3-117
   Width Field ............................................. 3-118
   Precision Field .......................................... 3 - 118
   Size-mod Field .......................................... 3-118
   Type Field .............................................. 3-119
putc (C) - Standard I/O ..................................... 3 - 122
putchar (C) - Standard I/O .................................. 3 -123
puts (C) - Standard I/O ..................................... 3 - 124
qsort (C) - Miscellaneous .................................... 3 -125
ran (M) - Float Math ........................................ 3 - 127
rand (C) - Integer Math ...................................... 3 - 128



                                VB
read (C) - UNIX I/O ........................................ 3 - 129
realloc (C) - Memory Allocation ...................... , ....... 3-130
remove (C) - Standard I/O .................................. 3 -131
rename (0 - Standard I/O ................................... 3- 132
rewind (C) - Standard I/O ................................... 3-133
rindex (C) - String Handling ................................. 3-134
sbrk (0 - Memory Allocation ................................ 3-135
scanf (C/M) - Standard I/O .................................. 3 - 136
   THE FORMAT STRING .................................. 3 -136
   Matching White Space Characters ......................... 3 - 136
   Matching Ordinary Characters ............................ 3 - 137
   Matching Conversion Specifications ....................... 3 - 137
   Details of Input Conversion ............................... 3 - 137
scdir (C) - Amiga . " ........................................ 3-141
screen (S) - Amiga .......................................... 3 - 142
segload (0 - Amiga ........................................ 3 -144
sctbllf (0 - Standard I/O .................................... 3-145
sctenv (C) - Miscellaneous ................................... 3-146
setjmp - Miscellaneous ..................................... 3 - 147
setvbuf (C) - Standard I/O ................................... 3 - 148
signal (0 - Signal .......................................... 3 - 150
   Signals and the sig Parameter ............................. 3 - 150
   Signal Processing and the func Parameter .................. 3 -150
   Return Values from Signal ................................ 3- 151
sin (M) - Float Math ......................................... 3 - 153
sinh (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3 -154



                               viii
sprintf (C, M) - Conversion .................................. 3 - 155
sqrt (M) - Float Math ........................................ 3- 156
sran (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3 -157
srand (0 - Integer Math ..................................... 3-158
sscanf (C,M) - Conversion ................................... 3 - 159
stat (C) - UNIX I/O ......................................... 3 - 160
_stkchk (0 - Miscellaneous .................................. 3-161
_stkover (0 - Miscellaneous ................................. 3 - 162
strcat (C) - String Handling .................................. 3 - 163
strchr (0 - String Handling .................................. 3 - 164
strcmp (C) - String Handling ................................. 3 - 165
strcoll (0 - String Handling ................................. 3 -167
strcpy (C) - String Handling ................................. 3 - 168
strcspn (C) - String Handling ................................ 3 -169
strlen (0 - String Handling .................................. 3-170
stmcat (C) - String Handling ................................. 3 - 171
stmcmp (0 - String Handling ............................... 3 - 172
stmcpy (C) - String Handling ................................ 3 - 173
strpbrk (0 - String Handling ................................ 3 -174
strrchr (0 - String Handling ................................. 3 - 175
strspn (0 - String Handling ................................. 3 - 176
strstr (0 - String Handling .................................. 3 - 177
strtod (0 - Conversion ...................................... 3-178
strtok (0 - String Handling .................................. 3- 179
strxfrm (C) - String Handling ................................ 3 -181


                                IX
    tan (M) - Float Math ........................................ 3 -182
    tanh (M) - Float Math ....................................... 3- 183
    time (C) - Time ............................................. 3-184
    tmpfile (C) - Standard I/O .................................. 3 -185
    tmpnam (C) - Standard I/O .................................. 3- 186
    tolower (C) - Conversion .................................... 3 - 187
    toupper (C) - Conversion .................................... 3 - 188
    ungetc (C) - Standard I/O ................................... 3 - 189
    unlink (C) - UNIX I/O ...................................... 3 -190
    va_arg, va_end, va_start (C) - Variable Arguments .............. 3-191
    vfprintf(C) - Standard I/O .................................. 3 -192
    vprintf (C) - Standard I/O ................................... 3- 193
    vsprintf (C) - Conversion .................................... 3-194
    _wb_parse (C) - Amiga ...................................... 3-195
    write (C) - UNIX I/O ....................................... 3 -196


Chapter 4 - Workbench
    Amiga Reference Guides .................................... 4 - 1
    Amiga Workbench Functions ................................ 4 - 2




                                   x
             INTRODUCTION




Chapter 1 - Introduction
  This is the Aztec C Library ManUilI and is included as a part of your total
  Aztec C documentation package. See your Aztec C User Guide for a listing
  of all of the Aztec C configurations and documentation that are available
  for the Amiga.
  The Aztec C User Guide showed you how to install your software and how
  to begin using Aztec C easily and quickly. The Aztec C Reference ManUilI
  presented more advanced programs and a more thorough understanding
  of how the Aztec C package works.
  This Aztec C Library ManUilI includes an overview, listing, and description
  of all the library functions that are included with your Aztec C package,
  and a listing of the Amiga Workbench function names and syntax.
  Of course, this Aztec C Library ManUilI also contains a detailed Table of
  Contents and an Index.

ANSle
  Aztec C is fully dpANSI standard. If you have used Aztec C prior to Version
  5.0, you should note that this standardization has caused the library func-
  tions included with your Aztec C system to change substantially. Before
  using Aztec C, you should carefully review the Library Overview chapter
  and the Library Functions chapter for a more complete understanding of
  ANSI and how it has affected the library functions.
        LIBRARY OVERVIEW



Chapter 2 - Library Overview

Introduction
  This chapter discusses the libraries included with Aztec C for the Amiga
  and gives an overview, by category, of the Aztec and Amiga functions
  provided in this manual.
  The chapter first presents a library summary and then divides into the
  following sections.

  1. Overview of Aztec C and Amiga I/O
  2. Overview of Aztec C Standard I/O
  3. Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Unbuffered I/O
  4. Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Console I/O
  5. Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Dynamic Buffer Allocation
  6. Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Error Processing
  7. Overview of ANSI Header Files


Library Summary
  More detailed information about Aztec C libraries is available in the
  Getting Started Chapter of the Aztec C User Guide. If you are planning to
                    Aztec C Library Manual



  use special libraries for 16 bit ints or specialized floating point libraries, you
  should read the material in that chapter.
  If you are using Arniga Workbench routines, you should read material
  relating to the Amiga Workbench functions, the functions.h header, and
  direct resident library calls, in the Getting Started Chapter of the Aztec C
  User Guide and the Compiler Chapter of the Aztec C Reference Manual.
  Aztec C for the Amiga features support for Workbench functions and
  includes the following libraries:
       c.lib        standard I/O and Arniga toolbox routines
       m.1ib        Manx IEEE double and extended precision math library
       mf.lib       Motorola Fast Floating Point math library
        ma.1ib      Arniga IEEE double precision math library
        mS.lib      68881 coprocessor math library
        s.lib       screen functions
   The distributed headers and libraries reflect the following:

31-Character Names
   Global names in Aztec C have 31 significant characters and have a leading
   underscore.

Integer Sizes
   c.lib uses and expects 32 bit integers. If source files are compiled using 16
   bit integers (such as with the -ps option) then the 16 bit libraries such as
   c16.lib must be used when linking. Additional information on special
   libraries and alternate data definitions can be found in the Getting Started
   Chapter of the Aztec C User Guide.
   Note to previous users: Prior to Version 5.0, Aztec C's default integer size
   was 16 bits.
                                           Library Overview



Overview of Aztec C and Amiga 1/0
  There are two sets of functions for accessing files and devices: the unbuf-
  fered I/O functions and the standard I/O functions. The Aztec C standard
  I/O functions conform to the ANSI standard, while the unbuffered I/O
  functions behave like those described in Chapter 8 of The C Programming
  Language.

Aztec ClIO Functions
  The unbuffered I/O functions are so called because, with few exceptions,
  they transfer information directly between a program and a file or device.
  By contrast, the standard I/O functions maintain buffers through which
  data must pass on its journey between a program and a disk file.
  The unbuffered I/O functions are used by programs that perform their own
  blocking and unblocking of disk files. The standard I/ 0 functions are used
  by programs which need to access files but do not want to be bothered with
  the details of blocking and unblocking the file records.
  The basic procedure for accessing files and devices is the same for both
  standard and unbuffered I/O: The device or file must first be "opened," e.g.,
  prepared for processing; then I/O operations occur; then the device or file
  is "closed."
  There is a limit on the number of files and devices that can simultaneously
  be open; the limit on your system is 20.
  Each set of functions has its own functions for performing these operations.
  For example, each set has its own functions for opening a file or device.
  Once a file or device has been opened, it can be accessed only by functions
  in the same set as the function that performed the open and must be closed
  by the appropriate function in the same set. There are exceptions to this
  nonintermingling that are described below.
  There are two ways a file or device can be opened: First, the program can
  explicitly open it by issuing a function call. Second, it can be associated with
  one of the logical devices (standard input, standard output, or standard
  error) and then opened when the program starts.
                    Aztec C Library Manual



Preopened Devices and Command Line Arguments
   There are three logical devices which are automatically opened when a
   program is started: standard input, standard output, and standard error. By
   default, these are associated with the console. The operator, as part of the
   command line which starts the program, can specify that these logical
   devices are to be "redirected" to another device or file. Standard input is
   redirected by entering on the command line, after the program name, the
   name of the file or device, preceded by the character <. Standard output is
   redirected by entering the name of the file or device, preceded by>.
   For example, suppose the executable program cpy reads standard input
   and writes it to standard output. Then the following command will read
   lines from the keyboard and write them to the display:
      cpy
   The following will read from the keyboard and write it to the file
   test file:
      cpy > testfile
   This will copy the file exraplfil to the console:
     cpy < exraplfil
   And this will copy exraplfil to testfile:
       cpy < exraplfil > testfile
   Aztec C will pass command line arguments to your program via the
   function main (argc, argv) . argc is an integer containing the number
   of arguments plus one; argv is a pointer to an array of character pointers,
   each of which, except the first, points to a command line argument. On
   some systems, the first array element points to the command name; on
   others, it is a null pointer.
   For example, if the following command is entered:
      prog argl arg2 arg3
   the program prog will be activated and execution begins at your function
   main () . The first parameter to main is the integer 4. The second parameter
   is a pointer to an array of four character pointers; on some systems the first
   array element will point to the string "prog" and on others it will be a null
   pointer. The second, third, and fourth array elements will be pointers to the
   strings argl, arg2, and arg3, respectively.
                                             Library Overview



    The command line can contain both arguments to be passed to your
    program and I/O redirection specifications. The I/O redirection strings
    will not be passed to your program and can appear anywhere on the
    command line after the command name but BEFORE any arguments. For
    example, the standard output of the prog program can be redirected to the
    file outfile by the following command; in this case the argc and argv
    parameters to the main function of prog are the same as if the redirection
    specifier was not present:
       prog > outfile argl arg2 arg3


File 1/0
    A program can access files both sequentially and randomly, as discussed in
    the following paragraphs.

    Sequential 110
    For sequential access, a program simply issues any of the various read or
    write calls. The transfer will begin at the file's current position and will
    leave the current position set to the byte following the last byte transferred.
    A file can be opened for read or write access; in this case, its current position
    is initially the first byte in the file. A file can also be opened for append
    access; in this case its current position is initially the end of the file.
    On systems that do not keep track of the last character written to a file, it is
    not always possible to correctly position a file to which data is to be
    appended.

    Random 1/0
    Two functions are provided which allow a program to set the current
    position of an open file: fseekO, for a file opened for standard I/O; and
    IseekO, for a file opened for unbuffered I/O.
    A program accesses a file randomly by first modifying the file's current
    position using one of the seek functions. Then the program issues any of
    the various read and write calls, which sequentially access the file.
    A file can be positioned relative to its beginning, current position, or end.
    Positioning relative to the beginning and current position is always correct-
    ly done. For systems which do not keep track of the last character written
                     Aztec C Library Manual



   to a file, positioning relative to the end of a file cannot always be correctly
   done.

Opening Flies
   Opening files is somewhat system dependent: The parameters to the open
   functions are the same on the Aztec C packages for all systems, but some
   system dependencies exist, to conform with the system conventions. For
   example, the syntax of filenames and the areas searched for files differ from
   system to system.

Device 1/0
   Aztec C allows programs to access devices as well as files. Each system has
   its own names for devices.

Console 1/0
   Console I/O can be performed in a variety of ways. There is a default mode,
   and other modes can be selected by calling the function ioctlO.
   When the console is in default mode, console input is buffered and is read
   from the keyboard one line at a time. Typed characters are echoed to the
   screen and you can use the standard operating system line editing facilities.
   A program does not have to read an entire line at a time (although the
   system software does this when reading keyboard input into its internal
   buffer), but at most one line will be returned to the program for a single
   read request.
   The other modes of console I/O allow a program:
       • to get characters from the keyboard as they are typed, with or
         without their being echoed to the display
       • to disable normal system line editing facilities
       • to terminate a read request if a key is not depressed within a cer-
         tain interval.
   Output to the console is always line buffered: Display occurs when a
   newline is output or when a request for console input is made. The only
   choice concerns translation of the newline character; by default, this is
   translated into a carriage return, line feed sequence.
                                                   Overview


   Optionally, this translation can be disabled.

1/0 to Other Devices
   On most systems, few options are available when writing to devices other
   than the console. The options available on the Amiga are discussed in the
   Amiga Rom Kernel Reference Manual.

Mixing Unbuffered and Standard 1/0 Calls
   As mentioned above, a program generally accesses a file or device using
   functions from one set of functions or the other, but not both.
   However, there are functions which facilitate this dual access: If a file or
   device is opened for standard I/O, the function filenoO returns a file
   descriptor which can be used for unbuffered access to the file or device. If
   a file or device is open for unbuffered I/O, the function fdopenO will
   prepare it for standard I/O as well.
   Care is warranted when accessing devices and files with both standard and
   unbuffered I/O functions.

AMIGA 1/0 FUNCTIONS
    A maximum of 20 files and devices, including the standard I/O devices,
    can be opened at once for both standard and unbuffered 1/ o. When this
    limit is reached, an open file or device must be closed before another can
    be opened.
   Amiga functions are also supplied for accessing files and devices--a pro-
   gram can access some files and devices using the Amiga functions and
   others using the ANSI-compatible functions.
   The ANSI-compatible I/O functions contain tables having a fixed number
   of entries, one for each open file or device. The number of entries in the
   table sets the limit on the number of files and devices that can be accessed
   simultaneously using the ANSI-compatible functions. AmigaOos has
   similar limits on the number of files and devices that can be accessed. Using
   an AmigaOos entry will simultaneously tie up an ANSI entry. There are
   more available AmigaOos entries than ANSI entries. If the ANSI table is
   full, you might choose to open a device or file using AmigaOos I/O
   functions.
                   Aztec C Library Manual



Preopened Devices and Command Line Arguments
   For programs running on an Arniga, the program name is pointed at by the
   first item in the array that is pointed at by the second argument of the
   program mainO function. That is, if the mainO function begins
      main (argc, argv)
      int argc; char *argv[];
   the argv [ 0] is a pointer to the program name.

FILE I/O
   Unlike some systems supported by Aztec C, positioning of a file relative to
   its end is always correctly done with the following limitation: You cannot
   position a file beyond its end.

Device I/O
   Using the ANSI-compatible I/O functions, a program can access devices
   using their AmigaOOS names. For a list of these names, and a description
   of device I/O using AmigaDOS, see the AmigaDOS manuals.
   A program can also access devices using Amiga function calls. These calls
   bypass the ANSI-compatible I/O system and AmigaOOS, and give a pro-
   gram the most control over devices. For example, when accessing the serial
   device using the Amiga functions, a program has control over the device's
   baud rate, etc., which it does not have when accessing the serial device
   using the ANSI-compatible or AmigaOOS functions.
   The ANSI-compatible functions supplied with Aztec C support console I/O
   differently on other systems than they do on the Amiga. On other systems,
   there is one console device and a program can issue calls to the ioctIO
   function to define how console I/O is to be performed. On the Amiga,
   ioctlO is only supported for setting RAW mode. See the ioctlO command
   in the Library Functions chapter of this manual for more information.

   Aborting a Program from the Console
   To abort a program, the operator types "C which Chk_AbortO detects.
   Chk_AbortO calls a routine called _abortO which prints a "C and then calls
   exitO. This routine can be replaced by the program so that the program can
   do any cleaning up that is necessary before exiting.
                                                     Overview



   When called, Chk_AbortO aborts the program if (1) AC is typed and (2) the
   global long Enable_AbortO is nonzero (which it is by default). If either of
   these conditions is not satisfied, Chk_AbortO simply returns.
   Therefore, to disable the ability of the operator to abort a program by typing
   AC, a program must set Enable_AbortO to O. Chk_AbortO is called in all
   the low level I/O routines such as openO, readO, writeO, and IseekO.


Overview of Aztec Standard 1/0

Aztec C Standard 1/0 Functions
   The standard I/O functions are used by programs to access files and
   devices. Aztec C functions are fully compatible with the ANSI standard.
   These functions provide programs with convenient and efficient access to
   files and devices. When accessing files, the functions buffer the file data;
   that is, they handle the blocking and unblocking of file data. Therefore, your
   program can concentrate on its own concerns.

Opening Flies and Devices
   Before a program can access a file or device, it must be "opened," and when
   processing on a file or device is done, it must be "closed."
   An open device or file is called a STREAM and has associated with it a
   pointer, called a FILE POINTER, to a structure of type FILE. This identifies the
   file or device when standard I/O functions are called to access it.
   It contains such information as the file position, pointer to an associated
   buffer, an error indicator, and an end-of-file indicator.
   There are two ways for a file or device to be opened for standard I/O: first,
   the program can explicitly open it, by calling one of the functions fopenO,
   freopenO, or fdopenO. In this case, the openO function returns the file
   pointer associated with the file or device. fopenO opens the file or device.
   freopenO reopens an open stream to another file or device; it is mainly used
   to change the file or device associated with one of the logical devices
   (standard output, standard input, or standard error.) fdopenO opens for
   standard I/O a file or device already opened for unbuffered I/O.
                       Aztec C Library Manual



   Alternatively, the file or device can be automatically opened as one of the
   logical devices (standard input, standard output, or standard error.) In this
   case, the file pointer is stdin, stdout, or stderr, respectively. These symbols
   are defined in the header file stdio.h.

Closing Streams
   A file or device opened for standard I/O can be closed in two ways:
       • The program can explicitly close it by calling the function
         fcloseO.
       • When the program terminates, either by falling off the end of the
         function mainO, or by calling the functIon exHO, the system will
         automatically close all open streams.
   Letting the system automatically close open streams is error-prone: Data
   written to files using the standard I/O functions is buffered in memory, and
   a buffer is not written to the file until it is full or the file is closed. Most likely,
   when a program finishes writing to a file, the file buffer will be partially
   full, with this information not having been written to the file. If a program
   calls fcloseO, this function will write the partially filled buffer to the file and
   return an error code if this could not be done. If the program lets the system
   automatically close the file, the program will not know if an error occurred
   on this last write operation.

Sequential I/O
   Files can be accessed sequentially and randomly. For sequential access,
   simply issue repeated read or write calls; each call transfers data beginning
   at the current position of the file and updates the current position to the
   byte following the last byte transferred. When a file is opened, its current
   position is set to zero if opened for read or write access, and to its end if
   opened for append.

Random I/O
   The function fseekO allows a file to be accessed randomly, by changing its
   current position. Positioning can be relative to the beginning, current
   position, or end of the file.
                                                      Overview



Buffering
   When the standard I/O functions are used to access a file, the I/O is
   buffered. Either a user-specified or dynamically-allocated buffer can be
   used.
   Your program specifies a buffer to be used for a file by calling the function
   setbufO after the file has been opened but before the first I/O request to it
   has been made.
   If, when the first I/O request is made to a file, you have not specified the
   buffer to be used for the file, the system will automatically allocate, by
   calling mallocO, a bufferfor it. When the file is closed its buffer will be freed,
   by calling freeO.
   Dynamically allocated buffers are obtained from a particular region of
   memory (the heap), whether requested by the standard I/O functions or
   by your program.
   The default size of an I/O buffer is given by the manifest constant BUFSIZ
   in stdio.h.
   By default, output to the console using standard I/O functions is unbuf-
   fered; all other device I/O using the standard I/O functions is buffered.
   Console input buffering can be disabled using the setbufO function.

Errors
   There are three fields that may be set when an exceptional condition occurs
   during stream I/O. Two of the fields are unique to each stream (Le., each
   stream has its own pair). The other is a global integer.
   One of the fields associated with a stream is set if end of file (EOF) is
   detected on input from the stream; the other is set if an error occurs during
   I/O to the stream. Once set for a stream, these flags remain set until the
   stream is closed or the program calls the c1earerrO function for the stream.
   The only exception to the last statement is that when called, fseekO will
   reset the EOF flag for a stream. A program can check the status of the EOF
   and error flags for a stream by calling the functions feofO and ferrorO,
   respecti vely.
   The other field which may be set is the global integer ermo. By convention,
   a system function which returns an error status as its value can also set a
   code in ermo which more fully defines the error.
                    Aztec C             Manual



  If an error occurs when a stream is being accessed, a standard I/O function
  returns EOF (-1) as its value, after setting a code in erma and setting the
  stream's error flag.
  If EOF is reached on an input stream, a standard I/O function returns EOF
  after setting the stream's EOF flag.
  There are two techniques a program can use for detecting errors during
  stream I/O. First, the program can check the result of each I/O call. Second,
  the program can issue I/O calls and only periodically check for errors (for
  example, check only after all I/O is completed).
  On input, a program will generally check the result of each operation.
  On output to a file, a program can use either error checking technique;
  however, periodic checking by calling ferrorO is more efficient. When
  characters are written to a file using the standard I/O functions they are
  placed in a buffer, which is not written to disk until it is full. If the buffer is
  not full, the function will return good status. It will only return bad status
  if the buffer was full and an error occurred while writing it to disk. Since
  the buffer size is 1024 bytes, most write calls will return good status, and
  hence periodic checking for errors is sufficient.
  Once a file opened for standard I/O is closed, ferrorO cannot be used to
  determine if an error has occurred while writing to it. Thus ferrorO should
  be called after all writing to the file is completed but before the file is closed.
  The file should be explicitly closed by fcloseO, and its return value checked,
  rather than letting the system automatically close it, to know positively
  whether an error has occurred while writing to the file. The reason for this
  is that when the writing to the file is completed, its standard I/ 0 buffer will
  probably be partly full. This buffer will be written to the file when the file
  is closed, and fcloseO will return an error status if this final write operation
  fails.


THE STANDARD I/O FUNCTIONS
  The standard I/O functions can be grouped into two sets: those that can
  access only the logical devices (standard input, standard output, and
  standard error); and all the rest. Functions marked obsolete will not be
  supported in future releases. You will also need to refer to release 3.6
  documentation for detailed specifications for some of these functions.
                                      L        Overview


Here are the standard I/O functions that can only access stdin, stdout, and
stderr. These are all ASCII functions; Le., they expect to deal with text
characters only.
   getcharO         Get an ASCII character from stdin
   getsO            Get a line of ASCn characters from stdin
   printfO          Fonnat data and send it to stdout
   *puterrO         Send a character to stderr - obsolete
   putcharO         Send a character to stdout
   putsO            Send a character string to stdout
   scanfO           Get a line from stdin and convert it
   vprintfO         Fonnat data using a variable argument list and send
                    it to stdout.

Here are the rest of the standard I/O functions. Those preceded by an
asterisk (*) are non-ANSI functions:
   clearerrO        Clear EOF and error flag for stream
   fcloseO          Close an open stream
   *fdopenO         Open as a stream a file or device already
                    open for unbuffered I/O
   feofO            Check for EOF on a stream
   ferrorO          Check for error on a stream
   fflushO          Write stream's buffer
   fgeteO           Get the next character from an input stream
   fgetposO         Get infonnation on file position
   fgetsO           Get a line of ASCII characters
   *filenoO         Get file descriptor associated with stream
   fopenO           Open a file or device
   £printfO         Fonnat data and write it to a stream
   £puteO           Write a character to an output stream
   £putsO           Send a string of ASCII characters to a
                    stream
   freadO           Read data from a specified stream.
   freopenO         Open an open stream to another file
                    or device
   fseanfO          Get data and convert it
                    Aztec C Library Manual


      fseekO           Set current position within a file
      fsetposO         Set file position
      ftellO           Get current position
      fwriteO          Write data to a stream
      getcO            Macro for fgetcO
      "getwO           Get two characters from stream - obsolete
      perror           Map ermo to a descriptive string
      putc             Macro for fputcO
      "putw            Send two characters to a stream - obsolete
      remove           Deletes a file
      rename           Changes the name by which a file is accessed
      rewind           Set file position to
      setbuf           Specify buffer and buffering
      setvbuf          Specify buffer, buffering, and buffer size
      tmpfile          Creates a temporary binary file
      tmpnam           Generates a unique name for a file
      ungetc           Push character back into stream
      vfprintf         Format data using a variable argument list and write
                       to a stream

AMIGA STANDARD 1/0

Buffering
   On the Arniga, the size of a buffer used for standard 1/ 0 is 1024 bytes.


Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Unbuffered 1/0
   The Aztec C unbuffered I/O functions are used to access files and devices.
   They are similar to their UNIX counterparts with the addition that a file
   may be opened as either text or binary. The Amiga unbuffered I/O func-
   tions are described at the end of this section.
   A program using these functions communicates directly with files and
   devices; data does not pass through system buffers. Some unbuffered I/O,
   however, is buffered. When data is transferred to or from a file in blocks
                                                Overview



smaller than a certain value, it is buffered temporarily. This value differs
from system to system, but is always less than or equal to 512 bytes. Also,
console input can be buffered, and is buffered, unless specific actions are
taken by your program.
Programs which use the unbuffered I/O functions to access files generally
handle the blocking and unblocking of file data themselves. Programs
requiring file access but unwilling to perform the blocking and unblocking
can use the standard I/O functions.
Here are the unbuffered 1/0 functions:
   accessO          Determine if a file can be accessed in a specified
                    manner.
   closeO           Conclude the I/O on an open file
                    or device
   creatO           Crea te a file and open it
   ioctlO           Change console I/O mode
   isattyO          Is an open file or device the console?
   IseekO           Change the current position of an open file
   openO            Prepare a file or device for unbuffered
                    I/O
   readO            Read data from an open file or device
   renameO          Rename a file
   unlinkO          Delete a file
   writeO           Write data to an open file or device

The header file fcntl.h is designed to be used in conjunction with the
unbuffered I/O routines. It includes function declarations, macros to be
used with these functions, and the _dev structure declaration.
Before a program can access a file or device, it must be opened, and when
processing on it is done, it must be closed.
An open file or device has an integer known as a FILE DESCRIPTOR as-
sociated with it; this identifies the file or device when it is accessed.
There are two ways for a file or device to open for unbuffered I/O. First,
you can explicitly open it, by calling the function openO. In this case, openO
returns the file descriptor to be used when accessing the file or device.
                    Aztec C Library Manual



  Alternatively, you can automatically open the file or device as one of the
  logical devices (standard input, standard output, or standard error.) In this
  case, the file descriptor is the integer value 0, I, or 2, respectively.
   An open file or device is closed by calling the function close(). When a
   program ends, any devices or files still opened for unbuffered I/O will be
   closed.
   If an error occurs during an unbuffered I/O operation, the function returns
   -1 as its value and sets a code in the global integer errno.

FILE I/O
   Programs call the functions readO and writeO to access a file; the transfer
   begins at the current position of the file and proceeds until the number of
   characters specified by the program has been transferred.
   The current position of a file can be manipulated in various ways by a
   program, allowing both sequential and random access to the file. For
   sequential access, a program simply issues consecutive I/O requests. After
   each operation, the current position of the file is set to the character
   following the last one accessed.
   The function IseekO provides random access to a file by setting the current
   position to a specified character location.
   IseekO allows the current position of a file to be set relative to the end of a
   file. For systems which do not keep track of the last character written to a
   file, such positioning cannot always be correctly done.
   openO provides a mode, O_APPEND, which causes the file being opened
   to be positioned at its end. As with IseekO, the positioning may not be
   correct for systems which do not keep track of the last character written to
   a file. openO also provides for opening files as text by using the O_TEXT
   mode. The default mode is binary.
                                          Library Overview



DEVICE I/O

Unbuffered 110 to the Console
   There are several options available when accessing the console. Here we
   want to briefly discuss the line- or character-modes of console I/O as they
   relate to the unbuffered I/O functions.
   Console input can be either line- or character-oriented. With line-oriented
   input, characters are read from the console into an internal buffer a line at
   a time, and returned to the program from this buffer. Line buffering of
   console input is available even when using the so-called unbuffered I/O
   functions.
   With character-oriented input, characters are read and returned to the
   program when they are typed; no buffering of console input occurs.

Unbuffered 110 to Nonconsole Devices
   Unbuffered I/O to devices other than the console is truly unbuffered.


Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Console 1/0
   A program has control over several options relating to console I/O. The
   primary option supported by the Amiga is the RAW mode, described
   below.

Character-Oriented Input
   The basic idea of character-oriented console input is that a program can
   read characters from the console without having to wait for an entire line
   to be entered.
   The behavior of character-oriented console input differs from system to
   system, so programs requiring both machine independence and character-
   oriented console input have to be careful in their use of the console.
   However, it is possible to write such programs, although they may not be
   able to take full advantage of the console I/O features available for a
   particular system.
                    Aztec C Library Manual



   The type of character-oriented console input which the Amiga supports is
   type RAW. In RAW mode, a program does not have control over the other
   console options.

Writing System-Independent Programs
   To write system-independent programs that access the console in charac-
   ter-oriented input mode, the console should be set in RAW mode, and the
   program should read only a single character at a time from the console.
   The standard I/O functions all read one character at a time from the console,
   even when the calling program requests several characters. Thus, programs
   requiring system independence and character-oriented input can read the
   console using the standard I/O functions.
   Some systems require a program that wants to set console options to first
   call ioctlO, to fetch the current console options, then modify them as
   desired, and finally call ioctlO to reset the new console options. The systems
   that do not require this do not care if a program first fetches the console
   options and then modifies them. Thus, a program requiring system-inde-
   pendence and console I/O options other than the default should fetch the
   current console options before modifying them.

Using loctl
   A program selects console I/O modes using the function ioctlO. This has
   the form:
       #include sgtty.h
       ioctl(fd, code, arg)
       struct sgttyb *arg;

   The header file sgtty. h defines symbolic values for the code parameter
   (which tells ioctl what to do) and the structure sgttyb.
   The parameter fd is a file descriptor associated with the console. On UNIX,
   this parameter defines the file descriptor associated with the device to
   which the ioctl call applies. Here, ioctl always applies to the console.
   The parameter code defines the action to be performed by ioctlO. It can
   have these values:
                                                    Overview



        TIOCGETP               Fetch the console parameters and store them
                               in the structure pointed at by argo

        TIOCSETP               Set the console parameters according to the
                               structure pointed at by argo

   The argument arg points to a structure named sgttyb that contains the
   following field:
      int sg_flags;

   To set console options, a program should fetch the current state of the fields,
   using ioctlO's TIOCGETP option. Then it should modify the fields to the
   appropriate values and call ioctlO again, using the ioctlO TIOCSETP op-
   tion.

THE sgtty FIELD
   s8-flags contains the UNIX-compatible flag RAW, which sets RAW mode
   and turns off other options. By default, RAW is disabled.
   On some systems, other flags are contained in s8-flags.
   More than one flag can be specified in a single call to ioctlO; the values are
   simply ORed together. If the RAW option is selected, none of the other
   options have any effect.
   When the console I/O options are set and RAW is reset, the console is set
   in line-oriented input mode.

EXAMPLE

Console Input· RAW Mode
   In this example, a program opens the console for standard I/O, sets the
   console in RAW mode, and goes into a loop, waiting for characters to be
   read from the console and then processing them. The characters typed by
   the operator are not displayed unless the program itself displays them. The
   input request will not terminate until a character is received.
                    Aztec C Library Manual



  This example assumes that the console is named con; on systems for which
  this is not the case, just substitute the appropriate name.
     include <stdio.h>
     #include <sgtty.h>
     main ()
     {
         int c;
         FILE *fp;
         struct sgttyb stty;
         if «fp     = fopen ("CON:x/y/width/
            height/", "r"»         ==
                                 NULL) {
            printf(ncan't open the console\nn);
            exit () ;

         ioctl(fileno(fp),TIOCGETP, &stty);
         stty.sg_flags 1= RAW;
         ioctl(fileno(fp), TIOCSETP, &stty);
         for (;;) {
            c = getc (fp) ;




Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Dynamic
Buffer Allocation
  Several functions are provided for the dynamic allocation and deallocation
  of buffers from a section of memory called the heap. They are:

         mallocO        Allocate a buffer
         callocO        Allocate a buffer and initialize it to zeroes
         reallocO       Allocate more space to a previously allocated
                        buffer
         freeO          Release an allocated buffer for reuse
                                                     Overview


   These functions are described in detail in the Library Functions chapter of
   this manual.
   In addition, on some systems the UNIX-compatible functions sbrkO and
   brkO provide a more elementary means to allocate heap space. The malloc-
   type functions call sbrkO to get heap space, which they then manage.
   On some systems, non-UNIX memory allocation functions are also sup-
   ported.

Dynamic Allocation of Standard 1/0 Buffers
   Buffers used for standard I/O are dynamically allocated from the heap
   unless specific actions are taken by your program. Standard I/O calls to
   dynamically allocate and deallocate buffers can be interspersed with those
   of your program.
   Programs that perform standard I/O and have absolute control of the heap
   can explicitly define the buffers to be used by a standard I/O stream.

Overview of Dynamic Buffer Allocation
   The Amiga function ImallocO is a non-UNIX memory allocation function.
   It is obsolete. It is supported in this release for compatibility. There is no
   detailed information for ImallocO in this document.
   Note: For more information about specific functions, see the Library Func-
   tions chapter. For more information about the heap, see the "Program
   Organization" section of the Technical Information chapter of your Aztec
   C Reference Manual.


Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Error Processing
   This section discusses error processing which relates to the global integer
   ermo. This variable is modified by the standard I/O, unbuffered I/O, and
   floating point math (e.g, sinO, sqrt() functions as part of their error process-
   ing.

   When a standard I/O, unbuffered I/O, or math function detects an error,
   it sets a code in ermo which describes the error. If no error occurs, the math
   functions do not modify ermo. If no error occurs, the 1/ 0 functions mayor
   may not modify ermo.
                 Aztec C Library Manual



Also, when an error occurs,
   • A standard I/O function returns -1 and sets an error flag for the
     stream on which the error occurred;
   • An unbuffered I/O function returns -1;
   • A math function returns a value dependent on the type of error
     that occurred and sets ermo. For example, an overflow would
     return HUGE_VAL.
When performing math calculations, a program can check ermo for errors
as each function is called. Alternatively, since ermo is modified only when
an error occurs, ermo can be checked only after a sequence of operations;
if it is nonzero, an error has occurred at some point in the sequence. This
latter technique can only be used when no I/O operations occur during the
sequence of math function calls.
Since ermo may be modified by an I/O function even if an error did not
occur, a program cannot perform a sequence of I/O operations and then
check ermo afterwards to detect an error. Programs performing unbuffered
I/O must check the result of each I/O call for an error.
Programs performing standard I/O operations cannot, following a se-
quence of standard I/O calls, check ermo to see if an error occurred.
However, associated with each open stream is an error flag. This flag is set
when an error occurs on the stream and remains set until the stream is
closed or the flag is explicitly reset. Thus a program can perform a sequence
of standard I/O operations on a stream and then check the stream's error
flag.

The following table lists the system-independent values that may be placed
in ermo. These symbolic values are defined in the file ermo.h. Other
system-dependent values may also be set in ermo following an 1/ 0 opera-
tion; these are error codes returned by the operating system. System de-
pendent error codes are described in the operating system manual for a
particular system.
                                          Library Overview



   The system-independent error codes and their meanings are:

           Error code     Meaning
           ENOENT         File or directory does not exist
           E2BIG          Argument list too long
           EBADF          Bad file descriptor - file is not open or
                          improper operation requested
           ENOMEM         Insufficient memory for requested
                          operation
           EEXIST         File already exists on creat() request
           EINVAL         Invalid argument
           ENFILE         Exceeded maximum number of open files
           EMFILE         Exceeded maximum number of file
                          descriptors
           ENOTTY         ioctIO attempted on non-console device
           EACCES         Invalid access request, permission denied
           EIO            I/O error (usually physical)
           ENOSPC         No space left on device
           ERANGE         Math function result too large
           EDOM           Domain of argument to math function invalid
           ENOEXEC        fexecO format error
           EROFS          Read-only file system
           EXDEV          Cross-device rename
           EAGAIN         Nothing to read



Overview of ANSI Header Files
   Header files may be included in any order. They may be included more than
   once in a given scope, without any adverse effects. The header files include:

assert.h
   Includes the assertO macro which may be used to display the file name and
   line number for a call that fails.
                     Aztec C Library Manual



ctype.h
    Includes several function declarations and macros useful for testing and
    ma pping characters.

errno.h
    Includes macros for the reporting of error conditions. See the section
    Overview of Aztec C and Amiga Error Processing.

fcntl.h
    Includes function declarations and macros for use with unbuffered I/O.

float.h
    Includes macros that define various floating point sizes and limits.

limits.h
    Includes macros that define the numerical limits for various ordinal types.

locale.h
    Includes macros and function declarations supporting the "C'locale neces-
    sary for C translation.

math.h
    Includes declarations for several mathematical functions that take double-
    precision arguments and return double-precision values.

setjrnp.h
    Includes the setjmpO macro for use with the longjmpO function.

signal.h
    Includes function declarations and macros for handling various signals.

stdarg.h
    Includes macros for advancing through a variable length argument list.
                                                   Overview



stddef.h
    Includes type definitions for pointer subtraction, result of sizeof operator
    (which is now 32 bits), and largest available character set.

stdio.h
    Includes types, macros, and function declarations for buffered I/O.

stdlib.h
    Includes types and function declarations for string conversion, memory
    management, and other general utilities.

strlng.h
    Includes function declarations for manipulating arrays of character type.

time.h
    Includes types and function declarations for obtaining the current date and
    time as well as manipulating it and other time structures.
             LIBRARY FUNCTIONS



Chapter 3 - Library Functions

Introduction
   This chapter contains two categories of library functions:
        • System-independent functions that are common to all Aztec C
          packages.
        • Machine-dependent functions that work only on the Amiga
          machines.
   Note: The Amiga WorkBench routines are also discussed in their own
   chapter.
   To help you access the information more easily and efficiently:
        • Each function description is listed alphabetically
        • Each function description begins on a new page.
   This introduction includes a list of all included library functions as well as
   an explanation of the format that the function descriptions feature.
   The individual function descriptions begin on page 3-9.
                                Aztec C Library Manual



FUNCTION LIST
  The functions described in this chapter include:

      _abortO - abort task
      absO - return the absolute value of a signed integer
      accessO - determine accessibility of a file or directory
      acosO - return the arc cosine of a double value
      asctimeO - translate a time value into an ASCII string
      asinO - return the arc sine of a double value
      assertO - verify program assertion
      atanO - return the arc tangent of a double value
      atan20 - return the arc tangent of a double value y/x
      atexitO - indicate a function to be called at program termination
      atofO - convert ASCII string to a double number
      atoiO - convert an ASCII string to a signed integer
      atolO - convert an ASCII string to a signed long value
      callocO - allocate space for an array of objects from system memory
      ceHO - compute the smallest integer not less than a specified number
      c1earerrO - clear end of file and error conditions in a stream
      _c1i_parseO - parse command line
      c1ockO - determine time intervals
      c1oseO - close a device or file
      cosO - return the cosine of a double value
      coshO - return the hyperbolic cosine of a double value
      cotanO - returns the cotangent of a double value
      creatO - create a new file
      ctimeO - convert a time value to an ASCII string
      difftimeO - compute the difference between two times
      divO - compute the quotient and remainder of the division of two
         integers
      dos_packetO - output packet
      exec10, execvO, exec1pO, execvpO -load and start another program
      exitO, _exitO - terminate calling program
      expO - compute the exponential function eX
                       Library Functions



fabsO - return the absolute value of a given number
fcloseO - close a buffered I/O stream
fdopenO - open a file or device previously opened for buffered I/O
   for standard I/O
feofO - test for end-of-file in a standard I/O stream
ferrorO - test for an error in a standard I/O stream
fexeclO, fexecvO -load and start another program
fflushO - flush an I/O stream
fgetcO - return the next available character from a standard 1/ 0 stream
fgetposO - save the current file position for a stream
fgetsO - get a string of characters from a stream
filenoO - return file descriptor associated with a stream
floorO - compute the largest integer not greater than a specified
    number.
fmodO - return the remainder of the double value x/y
fopenO - open a specified file or device for standard I/O access
formatO - write formatted data using a user-defined output function
fprintfO - write formatted data to an I/O stream
fputeO - write a character to an I/O stream
fputsO - write a string to an I/O stream
freadO - read from a specified standard I/O stream
freeO - deallocate a memory block
freesegO - segment unload function
freopenO - reopen a stream with a new device
frexpO - decompose a floating point number
fscanfO - perform formatted input conversion on a specified stream
fseekO - reposition current location within a stream
fsetposO - set the correct file position for a stream
ftellO - return the current file position within a standard I/O stream
ftoaO - convert floating point number to an ASCII string
fwriteO - write to a specified standard I/O stream
geta40 - set up a4 register
getcO - return the next available character from a standard I/O stream
getcharO - return the next available character from stdin
getenvO - get value of environment variable
                         Aztec C Library Manual



getsO - get a string of characters from stdin
gmtimeO - convert a calendar time into coordinated universal time
indexO - find the first occurrence of a character in a string
inCendO - restore machine state from within a C interrupt handler
inCstartO - set up a function as an interrupt handler
ioctlO - device I/O utility
labsO - return the absolute value of a signed long
IdexpO - build real numbers
IdivO - compute quotient and remainder of the division of two longs
localtimeO - convert a time value relative to local time
logO - compute the natural logarithm of a number
loglOO - compute the logarithm of a number to base 10
longjmpO - execute a non-local goto
IseekO - change current position within file
mallocO - allocate a block of system memory
memchrO - find a character within an object
memcmpO - compare two blocks of memory n bytes long
memcpyO - copy a block of bytes from one object to another
memmoveO - copy a block of memory
memsetO - set a block of memory to a specified value
mktempO - make a unique file name
mktimeO - convert a time value between formats
modfO - break a floating point value into integral and fractional parts
movmemO - copy a block of memory
openO - open device or file for unbuffered I/O
perror() - print a system error message
powO - compute x to the yth power
printfO - formatted output function
putcO - write a character to an I/O stream
putcharO - write a character to the stdout stream
putsO - write a string to stdout
qsortO - sort an array of records in memory
ranO - generate floating point random numbers
randO - return a pseudo-random integer
readO - read from a device or file using unbuffered I/O
                                Functions



reallocO - re-allocate an already existing memory block to a different
      size
removeO - delete a file
rename() - rename a disk file
rewindO - reposition a stream's position indicator to the beginning of
      the file
rindexO - find the last occurrence of a character in a string
sbrkO - memory allocation function
scanfO - perform formatted input conversion on the stdin stream
scdirO - return the name of the next file matching pattern
segloadO - load a program segment
setbufO - associate an I/O stream with a specific buffer
setenvO - set environment variables
setjmpO - set up for a non-local goto
setvbuf() - associate an I/O stream with a specific buffer
signalO - define how to handle a signal
sinO - return the sine of a double value
sinhO - return the hyperbolic sine of a double value
sprintfO - write formatted data to a buffer
sqrtO - compute the non-negative square root of a value.
sranO - set the random number seed for ranO
srandO - initialize the seed value used by randO
sscanfO - perform formatted input conversion on a buffer
statO - return file information
_stkchkO - check for stack overflow
_stkoverO - report stack overflow
strcat() - concatenate two strings together
strchrO - search for the first occurrence of a character in a string
strcmpO - compare two strings
strco1l0 - compare two strings using the current locale
strcpyO - copy one string to another
strcspnO - return the index of the first character in a string strl which
      is contained in a string str2
strlenO - return the length of a string
                                 Aztec C Library Manual



      strncatO - concatenate two strings together, up to max characters
      strncmpO - compare two strings, up to max characters.
      strncpyO - copy up to max characters from one string to another
      strpbrkO - return the first occurrence in a string strl of a character in
          a string str2.
      strrchrO - search for the last occurrence of a character in a string
      strspnO - return the index of the first character in a string strl which
          is not contained in a string str2
      strstrO - return a pointer of the first occurrence of a string str2 within
          a string strl
      strtodO - convert a string to a double
      strtokO - tokenize a string
      strxfrmO - transform a string to match the current locale
      tanO - return the tangent of a double value
      tanhO - return the hyperbolic tangent of a double value
      timeO - return the time of day
      tmpfileO - create a temporary file
      tmpnamO - create a name for a temporary file
      tolowerO - convert a character to lowercase
      toupperO - convert a character to uppercase
      ungetcO - push a character back into input stream
      unlinkO - erase file
      va_argO, va_endO, va_startO - variable argument access
      vfprintfO - write formatted ASCII data to a stream
      vprintfO - write formatted ASCII data to stdout
      vsprintfO - write formatted ASCII data to a buffer
      _wb_parseO - open standard I/O window
      writeO - write to a file or device using unbuffered I/O

DESCRIPTION FORMAT
  The description format is as shown on the following pages.
                               Library Functions



TYPE          Lists the name of the function, one or more letters in paren-
              theses which specify the libraries that contain the function, and
              the function category. The letters which may appear in paren-
              theses and their corresponding libraries are:

                 C          c.lib, c16.lib, cl.lib, c116.lib
                 M          m.lib, m8.lib, mf.lib, ma.lib
                 S          s.lib

               At the right margin, in italics, is the standard to which the
               function adheres, (Le., ANSI, UNIX, etc.)


NAME           Lists the name of the function and a brief description of its use.


SYNOPSIS       Indicates the types of arguments that the functions require, and
               the values it returns. For example, the function at of converts
               character strings into double precision numbers. It is listed in
               the synopsis as
                 double atof(const char *cp);
               This means that atof () returns a value of type double and
               requires as an argument a pointer to a character string. Since
               atofO returns a noninteger value, it must be declared prior to
               the use of the function:
                 double atof(const char *cp);
               Unless otherwise noted, the function's declaration is contained
               in the header file specified for that function.
               The nota tion
                 #include <stdlib.h>
               at the beginning of a synopsis indicates that such a statement
               should appear at the beginning of any program calling that
               function.


DESCRIPTION Describes the function.
                                Aztec C Library Manual



SEE ALSO       Lists other relevant functions. You should also refer to the
               Library Overview chapter for further information abou t many
               of the functions discussed in this chapter.


DIAGNOSTICS Describes the error codes that the function may return. The
               Errors Section in the Library Overview chapter presents an
               overview of error processing.


EXAMPLES       Gives examples on use of the function.
                              Library Functions



TYPE          _abort (C) - Miscellaneous                               Amiga


NAME          _abort - abort task


SYNOPSIS        void    abort(void)i

DESCRIPTION
              _abortO is a function that is called by the function Chk_AbortO
              if the flag Enable-Abort is nonzero and the AC key is entered
              by the user (or if the AC signal is sent to the task in general.)
              The library version of _abortO displays AC on the screen and
              calls exit(l).

              You may provide your own _abortO routine to take special
              action if AC is pressed. For example, the compiler, assembler,
              and linker remove any temporary files when AC is typed.
              _abortO calls a cleanup function that deletes the files, prints a
              message, and then calls exitO.




                                        _abort (C) - Miscellaneous
                                 Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           abs (C) - Integer Math                                   ANSI


NAME           abs - return the absolute value of a signed integer


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdlib.h>
                 int abs (int x);

DESCRIPTION absO computes and returns the absolute value of the signed
               integer x. The largest possible negative integer is returned as
               itself, since the largest negative integer cannot be represented
               positively in the size of an integer.


SEE ALSO       lab sO, fabsO




       abs (C) - Integer Math
                                 Library Functions



TYPE            access (C) - Standard I/O                                    Aztec


NAME            access - determine accessibility of a file or directory


SYNOPSIS          #include <fcntl.h>
                  int access (char "filename, int mode);

DESCRIPTION accessO determines whether a file or directory can be accessed
                in a specified manner.
                The parameter filename points to the name of the file or direc-
                tory; this name optionally contains the drive and path of the
                directories that must be passed through to get to the file or
                directory. If the drive component is not specified, the file or
                directory is assumed to reside on the default drive. If the path
                component is not specified, the file or directory is assumed to
                reside in the current directory on the specified drive.
                mode is an int that specifies the type of access desired:

                  Mode           Meaning
                  4              read
                  2              write
                  1              execute (if a file) or search (if a directory)
                  o              existence of the file or directory.

                If the existence of the file or directory is being checked (Le.,
                mode =0), accessO returns 0 if the file exists and -1 if it does not.
                In the latter case, accessO also sets the symbolic value
                ENOENT in the global integer ermo.
                When accessO is called to determine if a file can be accessed in
                a certain way (i.e., mode is not 0), accessO returns 0 if the file
                can be accessed in the desired manner; otherwise, it returns-1
                and sets a code in the global integer ermo that defines why the
                access is not permitted.




                                              access (C) - Standard I/O
                         Aztec C Library Manual



       When read or write privileges are requested on a directory,
       accessO reports on whether files can be read or written to
       within the directory, not whether or not the directory itself may
       be read or written to.
       The symbolic values that accessO may set in ermo when it is
       called with a non-zero mode parameter are:
         errno             Meaning
         ENOTDIR           A component of the path prefix is not a
                           directory.
         ENOENT            The file or directory does not exist.
         EACCES            File or directory cannot be accessed in the
                           desired manner




access (C) - Standard I/O
                               Library Functions



TYPE          acos (M) - Float Math                                         ANSI


NAME          acos - return the arc cosine of a double value


SYNOPSIS        #include <math.h>
                double acos (double x);

DESCRIPTION    acosO returns the arc cosine of x. x should be specified in
              radians. If x is outside of the range -1 to I, then acosO will return
              oand set errno equal to EDOM.




                                                  acos (M) - Float Math
                                  Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            asctime (C) - Time                                        ANSI


NAME            asctime - translate a time value into an ASCII string


SYNOPSIS          #include <time.h>
                  char *asctime (canst struct tm *timeptr);

DESCRIPTION asctimeO creates an ASCII text string corresponding to the time
                contained in timeptr. The general format of the resulting string
                is:
                  Mon Apr 9 08:29:00 1968\n\o

                A pointer to the text string is returned by asctime.


SEE ALSO        clockO, ctimeO, difftimeO, localtimeO, timeO




       asctime (C) - Time
                                Library Functions



TYPE            asin (M) - Float Math                                   ANSI


NAME            asin - return the arc sine of a double value


SYNOPSIS           #include <math.h>
                   double asin(double X)i

DESCRIPTION asinO returns the arc sine of x. x should be specified in radians.
            If x is outside of the range -1 to 1, then asinO will return 0 and
                 set ermo equal to EDOM.




                                                  asin (M) - Float Math
                                 Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           assert (Macro) - Miscellaneous                            ANSI


NAME           assert - verify program assertion


SYNOPSIS          #include <assert.h>
                  void assert (int expression);

DESCRIPTION The assertO macro is useful for putting diagnostic messages in
                a program. assertO determines whether expression is true or
                false. If expression evaluates to false, the message:
                  Assertion failed: expr, file ffff, line lnnn

                is printed to stdout, where ffff is the name of the source file
                and nnn is the line number where the assertion failed.

                To prevent assertion statements from being compiled in a
                program, compile the program with the option -dNDEBUG,
                or place the statement #define NDEBUG ahead of the state-
                ment #include assert.h.




       assert (Macro) - Miscellaneous
                              Library Functions



TYPE           atan (M) - Float Math                              ANSI


NAME           atan - return the arc tangent of a double value


SYNOPSIS         #include <math.h>
                 double atan (double X)i

DESCRIPTION atanO returns the arc tangent of x. x should be specified in
               radians.




                                                atan (M) - Float Math
                                  Aztec C          Manual



TYPE            atan2 (M) - Float Math                                  ANSI


NAME            atan2 - return the arc tangent of a double value y/x


SYNOPSIS           #include <math.h>
                   double atan2 (double y, double x);

DESCRIPTION atan20 returns the arc tangent of the ratio of the input values
            (y/x) in the range of -pi to pi. atan2() will use the signs of the
                input values to determine the correct quadrant of the return
                value. If both x and yare 0, atan2() returns 0 and sets errno
                equal to EDOM.




       atan2 (M) - Float Math
                                Library Functions



TYPE           atexit (C) - Miscellaneous                                ANSI


NAME           atexit - indicate a function to be called at program termination


SYNOPSIS            #include <stdUb.h>
                    int atexit (void (*fund (void»);

DESCRIPTION atexitO is used to indicate that the function func should be
               called at normal program termination. When a program
               returns from mainO, or the exitO function is called, atexitO
               insures that Junc is called.
               Up to 32 functions may be indicated as exitO functions with
               atexitO. atexitO will return a non-zero value if the function
               cannot be registered as an exitO function; otherwise, it returns
               o.

SEE ALSO       exitO




                                            atexit (C) - Miscellaneous
                                 Aztec C            Manual



TYPE           atof (M) - Conversion                                      ANSI


NAME           atof - convert ASCII string to a double number


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdlib.h>
                 double atof(const char *cp);


DESCRIPTION atofO converts a string of text characters pointed at by the
               argument cp to a double. The string may contain leading
               blanks and tabs, which it skips, followed by an optional sign
               (+ or -), then a number containing an optional decimal point
               (.), then an optional "E" or "e", followed by an optionally signed
               integer to denote scientific notation. Any characters beyond
               this are ignored.


EXAMPLE          #inc1ude <std1ib. h>
                 main ()
                  {
                      double val;
                      char *cp;

                      cp = "10.6789";
                      val = atof (cp);
                        printf (" val        = %e\n",val);

SEE ALSO       atoiO, atoIO, ftoaO




       at01 (M) - Conversion
                                Library Functions



TYPE           atoi(C) - Conversion                                     ANSI


NAME           atoi - convert an ASCII string to a signed integer


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  int atoi (canst char *cp);


DESCRIPTION atoiO converts a string of text characters pointed to by the
            argument cp into a signed integer value, which it returns. The
                fonnat of the string pointed at by cp should contain three
                components: optional leading blanks or tabs, followed by an
                option "+" or "-", followed by an integer. Any numbers follow-
                ing the integer will be ignored, although the string should be
                null-delimited.


EXAMPLE           #include <stdlib.h>
                  main ()
                   {
                       int i;
                       char *cp =      II   567";

                       i = atoi (cp);
                       printf ("I = %d\n",i);
                  }

SEE ALSO        atofO, atoI(), ftoaO




                                                    atoi(C) - Conversion
                                  Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            atol (0 - Conversion                                    ANSI


NAME            atol - convert an ASCII string to a signed long value


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  long atol (const char *cp);


DESCRIPTION atoIO converts the string of characters pointed to by the argu-
                ment cp to a signed long, which is then returned by atolO. The
                string may contain optional leading blanks, followed by an
                optional "+" or "_", followed by a string of digits. Anything
                beyond the string of digits is ignored. The string should also
                be null delimited.


EXAMPLE           #inc1ude <stdio.h>
                  #inc1ude <std1ib.h>
                  main 0
                  {
                      10nq va1;
                      char *cp = " 79832";

                      va1 = ato1 (cp);
                      printf ("va1 = %1d\n",va1);


SEE ALSO        atofO, atoiO, ftoaO




       atol (C) • Conversion
                                Library Functions



TYPE            calloc (0 - Memory Allocation                              ANSI


NAME            calloc - allocate space for an array of objects from system
                memory


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdlib.h>
                   void *calloc (size_t nmemb, size_t size);


DESCRIPTION callocO allocates system memory for an array of nmemb objects,
            each size bytes long, in a manner similar to the mallocO func-
            tion. The total size of the block will be size * nmemb bytes long,
            and each byte within the block is initialized to o. If callocO is
                successful, it returns a pointer to the allocated block.


SEE ALSO        mallocO, reallocO, freeO, ImallocO


DIAGNOSTICS If callocO cannot allocate a block large enough to hold nmemb
            elements each size bytes long, it will return a null pointer.
                Otherwise, a painter to the requested block is returned.




                                     calloc (C) - Memory Allocation
                                Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE          ceil (M) - Float Math                                     ANSI


NAME          ceil - compute the smallest integer not less than a specified
              number


SYNOPSIS        #include <math.h>
                double ceil (double x);


DESCR~PTION   ceilO will return the smallest integral number not less than its
              input, x. The return value is expressed as a double. For ex-
              ample, ceilO will return 6.0 for an input of 5.3, and -5.0 for an
              input of -5.3.


SEE ALSO      fabsO, flo orO




       ceil (M) - Float Math
                               Library Functions



TYPE            dearerr (C) - Standard VO                                 ANSI


NAME            dearerr - clear end of file and error conditions in a stream


SYNOPSIS          #indude <stdio.h>
                  void dearerr (FILE *stream);

DESCRIPTION dearerrO clears both the end-of-file and error condition codes
            associated with the specified stream. If an error or end-of-file
                condition occurs on a stream and dearerrO is not called, the
                error condition will remain set until the stream is closed.


SEE ALSO        feofO, ferrorO, perrorO




                                           clearerr (C) - Standard 1/0
                                Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE                                                                Amiga


NAME           _eli_parse - parse command line


SYNOPSIS         extern int _argc, _ar~len;
                 extern char** _argv, *_ar~lini
                 void _eli_parse (struct process *pp,
                      long char *aptr)


DESCRIPTION _eli_parseO is a function contained within the Aztec library
            which is called upon starting of a program from the CLI. Its
               purpose is to parse the command line string passed to the
               program from the CLI command line and convert it into argc-
               argv format. _eli_parseO is called by the routine _main with
               the following arguments:
                • pp pOints to the program's Process structure
                • aptr points to the command string
                • alen is the length of the command string.
               _eli_parse parses the command string, allocates memory for
               the parsed information, and sets up pointers to the parsed
               information in the global variables _argc, _ar~len, argv, and
               _arg_line. These variables are used by _main when calling
               main.
               This allocated memory is freed by _exitO.
               _elCparse is supplied as a separate module. Programs that
               wish to do custom argument parsing may supply their own
               routine that overrides the one from the library.

               It is also possible to produce smaller programs by replacing
               this function with a null function.




       _eli_parse (C) - Amiga
                              Library Functions



TYPE           clock (C) - Time                                    ANSI


NAME           clock - determine time intervals


SYNOPSIS         #include <time.h>
                 clock_t clock (void);

DESCRIPTION clockO is used to determine the time interval between two
              events. The 0 value returned by clockO should be divided by
              the macro CLF_TCK to determine the time in seconds.




                                                   clock (C) - Time
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            close (C) - UNIX 110                              Aztec/UNIX


NAME            close - close a device or file


SYNOPSIS           #include <fcntl.h>
                   int close (int fd);


DESCRIPTION closeO closes a device or disk file which has been opened for
                unbuffered I/O.
                The parameter fd is the file descriptor associated with the file
                or device. If the device or file was explicitly opened by the
                program by calling openO or creatO, fd is the file descriptor
                returned by openO or creatO.
                 close returns 0 as its value jf successful.


DIAGNOSTICS If closeO fails, it returns -1 and sets an error code in the global
                 integer errno.




       close (C) - UNIX I/O
                               Library Functions



TYPE            cos (M) - Float Math                                  ANSI


NAME            cos - return the cosine of a double value


SYNOPSIS           #include <math.h>
                   double cos (double -X)i

DESCRIPTION cosO returns the sine of x. x should be specified in radians.




                                                   cos (M) - Float Math
                                Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           cosh (M) - Float Math                                   ANSI


NAME           cosh - return the hyperbolic cosine of a double value


SYNOPSIS         #include <math.h>
                 double cosh (double x);

DESCRIPTION coshO returns the hyperbolic cosine of x. coshO will return
            HUGE_VAL and set ermo equal to ERANGE if x is greater than
            LOGHUGE.


DIAGNOSTICS The symbolic values are defined in math.h.




       cosh (M) - Float Math
                                         Functions



TYPE           cotan (M) - Float Math                              Aztec


NAME           cotan - return the cotangent of a double value


SYNOPSIS         #include <math.h>
                 double cotan {double X)i

DESCRIPTION cotanO returns the cotangent of x. x should be specified in
               radians. cotanO is not specified by ANSI and may not be
               portable to other compilers/architectures.


DIAGNOSTICS Error Codes:
               condition           return value           ermo

               I x I <TINY_VAL     -HUGE_VAL (if x<O)     ERANGE
                                   HUGE_VAL (if x>O)      ERANGE
               I x I >6.74652e9    0.0                    ERANGE




                                               cotan (M) - Float Math
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE             creat (C) - UNIX 110                                       Aztec


NAME             creat - create a new file


SYNOPSIS            #include <fcntl.h>
                    int creat (char *name, int pmode)i


DESCRIPTION creatO creates a file and opens it for unbuffered, write-only
            access. If the file already exists, it is truncated to 0 length (this
            is done by erasing and then creating the file).
                 creatO returns as its value an integer called a "file descriptor."
                 Whenever a call is made to one of the unbuffered 1/ 0 functions
                 to access the file, its file descriptor must be included in the
                 function's parameters.
                 name is a pointer to a character string which is the name of the
                 device or file to be opened.
                 For most systems, pmode is optional; if specified, it is ignored.
                 It should be included, however, for programs for which UNIX-
                 compatibility is required, since the UNIX creatO function re-
                 quires it. In this case, pmode should have the octal value 0666.
                  For some systems, pmode is required and has a special meaning.



DIAGNOSTICS If creatO fails, it returns -1 as its value and sets a code in the
            global integer errno.




       creat (C) - UNIX 1/0
                               Library Functions



TYPE            ctime (0 - Time                                       ANSI


NAME            ctime - convert a time value to an ASCII string


SYNOPSIS          #include <time.h>
                  char *ctime (const time_t *timer);

DESCRIPTION ctimeO is equivalent to the asctimeO function, except that the
                time value should be in time_t format rather than tm format.
                As with asctimeO, a pointer to the ASCII time string is
                returned.


SEE ALSO        asctimeO, timeO, localtimeO




                                                       clime (C) - Time
                                 Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            difftime (C) - Time                                   ANSI


NAME            difftime - compute the difference between two times


SYNOPSIS          #include <time.h>
                  double difftime (time_t timel, time_t
                   time 0);

DESCRIPTION difftimeO returns the difference of the two time values: timel
            - timeD. The difference is expressed in seconds and is returned
                asa double.


SEE ALSO        asctimeO, ctimeO




       difftime (C) - Time
                               Library Functions



TYPE            div (C) - Integer Math                                   ANSI


NAME            div - compute the quotient and remainder of the division of
                two integers


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  div_t div (int numerator, int denominator)


DESCRIPTION divO divides two signed integers and returns both the quotient
                and remainder as a type div_to The div_t type is defined in the
                stdlib.h header file as being:
                  typedef struct
                     int quoti
                     int remi
                    div_ti

SEE ALSO        IdivO




                                                 div (C) - Integer Math
                                Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE          dos_packet (0 - Amiga                               Amiga


NAME           dos_packet - output packet


SYNOPSIS         long dos_packet (port, type, argl, arg2, arg3,
                        arg4, argS, arg6, arg7)i
                 struct MsgPort "'porti
                 long type, argl, arg2, arg3, arg4, argS,
                        arg6, arg7;

DESCRIPTION dos_packetO sends a dos packet with the specified type and
               arguments to the specified port.




       dos_packet (C) - Amiga
                               Library Functions



TYPE           exec (C) - Amiga                                          Amiga


NAME           execl, execv, execlp, execvp -load and start another program


SYNOPSIS         execl (char *name, char *argO, char *argl,
                 "'I char *argn,O);
                 execv (char *name, char *argv);
                 execlp (char *name, char *argO, char *argl,
                 "'I char *argn,O);

                 execvp (char *name, char *argv[]);


DESCRIPTION The exec functions can be used within the CLI environment to
               load and start another program. The called program is loaded
               on top of the calling program; thus, if the exec function suc-
               ceeds, it does not return to the caller.

               Parameters
               name is the name of the file containing the program to be
               loaded.
               The exec functions can pass arguments to the called program.
               execlO and execlpO build a command line by concatenating
               the strings pointed at by argl, arg2, and so on. If a C program
               is being called, its main function will see argO as argvfOl, argl
               as argv[l], and so on.

               execvO and execvpO build a command line by concatenating
               the strings pointed at by argv[ol, argv[1I, and so on. The argv
               array must have a null pointer as its last entry. If a C program
               is being called, its main function will see the calling function's
               argv[i] as its argv[i].




                                                       exec (C) - Amiga
                         Aztec C Library Manual



       The Functions
       execlO and execvO load a program from the specified file.
       execlO is useful when a fixed number of arguments is being
       passed to a program. execvO is useful for programs which are
       passed a variable number of arguments.
       execlpO and execvpO will search for a program first in the
       current directory, then in the directories specified by the CLI
       Path command, and then in the C: directory.

       Other Features
       If an execO function fails, for example because the file does not
       exist, execO terminates the calling program.




exec (C) - Amiga
                                         Functions



TYPE            exit (C) - Miscellaneous                                   ANSI


NAME            exit, _exit - tenninate calling program


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  void exit (int code);
                  void _exit (int code);

DESCRIPTION exitO and _exitO tenninate the calling program, after releasing
                all dynamically-allocated memory that was obtained by call-
                ing mallocO, callocO, reallocO, or sbrkO. The functions differ
                in that exitO closes all files opened for standard and unbuffered
                I/O, while _exitO does not.
                If the program was started from within a CLI environment, the
                program's return code is set to code. Control then returns to a
                waiting program, which is usually the CLI. When the program
                was activated by another program's fexecO call, it is this calling
                program that is waiting and that resumes when the called
                program exits.

                If the program was started from the Workbench, then it was
                executing as an independent process. In this case, the
                program's process is deleted and the space associated with its
                stack, segment list, and process structure is released.




                                               exit (C) - Miscellaneous
                                Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           exp (M) - Float Math                                   ANSI


NAME           exp - compute the exponential function eX


SYNOPSIS         #include <math.h>
                 double exp (double x);


DESCRIPTION expO computes the exponential function of the input
            parameter x and returns it.


SEE ALSO       logO, loglOO, powO, sqrtO


DIAGNOSTICS Values of x which cause expO to compute an extremely large
               value, i.e., greater than LOG_HUGE, will cause expO to return
               the value HUGE_VAL and set the error code ERANGE in the
               globally defined integer ermo.
               Error codes:
               condition              return value          erma
               x>LOGHUGE                                   . ERANGE
               x<LOGTINY                                   ERANGE




       exp (M) - Float Math
                                        Functions



TYPE            fabs (M) - Float Math                                  ANSI


NAME            fabs - return the absolute value of a given number


SYNOPSIS           #include <math.h>
                   double fabs (double X)i


DESCRIPTION fabsO returns the absolute (or positive) value of the parameter
            x. Therefore, fabsO will return 5.3 for an input of either 5.3 or
            -5.3.


SEE ALSO        floorO, ceilO




                                                fabs (M) - Float Math
                                         Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE             fclose (C) - Standard I/O                                     ANSI


NAME             fclose - close a buffered I/O stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int fdose (FILE *stream);

DESCRIPTION fcloseO causes the specified stream to be flushed and the device
                 or file associated with the stream to be closed. Any data that
                 was written to the stream's output buffer but not yet written to
                 the file or device will be written by fcloseO before closing the
                 file, and the input and output buffers used by the stream will
                 be deallocated. fdoseO is automatically called by exitO before
                 exi ting the program so tha t no devices or files are left open after
                 the program terminates.


SEE ALSO         fopenO


DIAGNOSTICS fcloseO returns 0 if it is successful. If stream is not a valid, open
            stream, EOF is returned.




    fclose (C) - Standard I/O
                                Library Functions



TYPE           fdopen (C) - UNIX 110                                    Aztec/UNIX


NAME           fdopen - open a file or device previously opened for unbuf-
               fered I/O for standard I/O


SYNOPSIS             #include <stdio.h>
                     FILE *fdopen (int fd, char *mode);


DESCRIPTION fdopenO is used to associate a standard I/O stream with a file
                or device previously opened for unbuffered I/O (with open()
                or another unbuffered I/O function.) The mode parameter
                should match the mode with which the file or device was
                originally opened.
                The various modes and their meanings are:
                Mode             Meaning
                a                Open text stream for appending. If the file
                                 exists, it is positioned one character past the
                                 last character in the file. If the file does not exist,
                                 it is created. In both cases, the file is opened as
                                 wri te-only.
                ab               Same as a, except the stream is opened as bi-
                                 nary.
                a+               Same as a, except the stream may also be read
                                 from.
                a+b orab+        Same as a+, except the stream is opened as
                                 binary.
                r                Open text stream for reading only. If a file is
                                 opened, it is positioned at the first character in
                                 it. If the file or device does not exist, NULL is
                                 returned.
                rb               Same as r, except the stream is opened as bi-
                                 nary.


                                                       fdopen (C) - UNIX 1/0
                                  Aztec C Library Manual



            r+             Same as r, but the stream may also be written
                           to.
            r+b or rb+     Same as r+, except the stream is opened as
                           binary.
            w              Open a text stream for writing only. If a file is
                           opened which already exists, it is truncated to
                           zero length. If the file does not exist, it is created
                           with a length of O.
            wb             Same as w, except the stream is opened as
                           binary.
            w+             Same as w, except the stream may also be read
                           from.
            w+b or wb+     Same as W+, except the stream is opened as
                           binary.


SEE ALSO    fopenO, freopenO


EXAMPLE          #inc1ude <stdio.h>
                 #inc1ude <fcnt1.h>
                 #inc1ude <errno.h>
                 main (argc, argv)
                 char **argv;
                 int argc;

                   FILE *fp;
                   int fd;
                   fd = open (argv[l],
                   O_WRONLY+O_CREAT+O_EXCL);
                   if (fd == -1)




   fdopen (C) - UNIX 1/0
       Library Functions



  if (errno == EEXIST)
     printf ("file already exists\n");
  else if (errno == ENOENT)
     printf ("unable to open file \n");
  else
    printf ("open error \n");

else
  printf ("the file %s was opened\n",
      argv[l]);
if «fp = fdopen(fd, "r+"»    == NULL)
   printf ("can't open file for r+ \n");
else
   printf ("fdopen worked\n");
close (fd);
fclose (fp);




                           fdopen (e) - UNIX 1/0
                                        Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            feof (0 - Standard liD                                        ANSI


NAME            feof - test for end-of-file in a standard I/O stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int feof (FILE *stream)i


DESCRIPTION feofO is used to test for an end-of-file condition within a
            specified stream. feofO will return a non-zero value if a stream
            has reached an end of file; otherwise, it will return a zero. This
                function is necessary because the standard I/O functions
                return EOF not only for end -of-file condi tions, bu t also if a read
                error occurs.


SEE ALSO        ferrorO, clearerrO, filenoO, perrorO




    feof (e) - Standard 1/0
                                Library Functions



TYPE            ferror (0 - Standard liD                                  ANSI


NAME            ferror - test for an error in a standard I/O stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int ferror (FILE "stream);


DESCRIPTION ferrorO is used to determine if an I/O error has occurred in the
            specified stream. ferrorO will return a non-zero value if an error
            has occurred in the stream; otherwise, it will return a O. This
                function should be used in conjunction with the feofO function
                to distinguish between end-of-file and true error conditions.
                An error condition will persist until clearerrO is called or the
                stream is closed.

SEE ALSO         feofO, clearerrO, filenoO, perrorO




                                                ferror (C) - Standard I/O
                                       Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           fexecl, fexecv(C)- Amiga                                     Aztec


NAME           fexecl,fexecv-load and start another program


SYNOPSIS          fexecl (name, argO,argl,arg2, ...,argn, char*O>
                  char *name, *argO, *arg2, ...,*argn;

                  fexecv (name, argv)
                  char *name, *argv[];

                  waitO


DESCRIPTION The fexec functions load and call another program. The calling
                programis suspended while the called program is executing;
                the fexec function returns when the called program terminates.
                wait returns as its value the return code from the fexec-executed
                program.



                Parameters
                name specifies the name of the file containing the program to
                be loaded, and optionally, the drive on which it,s located and
                the path to it.
                The fexec functions can pass arguments to the called program.
                fexeclO builds a command line by concatenating the strings
                pointed at by argl, arg2, and so on. If a C program is being
                called, its main function will see argl as argv[1], arg2 as argv[2],
                and so on. argO, which on UNIX is normally the name of the
                program being called, isn't part of the constructed command
                line; also arguW] of a called C program is always set to a pointer
                to a null string. Even though argO isn't passed to a program
                when using Aztec C, it must still be specified, even if it is just
                a pointer in a null string. We recommend that you set it to a
                pointer to the name of the called program, for UNIX com-
                patibility.
                Library Functions



fexecvO builds a command line by concatenating the
stringspointed at by arcv[1], argv[2], and so on. The argv array
must have a null pointer as its last entry. If a C program is being
called, its main function will see the calling function's argv[i]
as its argv[i]. argv[O], which on UNIX is normally the name of
the program being called, isn't part of the constructed com-
mand line; also argv[OJ of a called C program is al ways a pointer
to a null string. Even though argv[OJ isn't passed to a program
when using Aztec C, it must still be specified, even if it is just
a pointer to a null string. We recommend that you set it to a
pointer to the name of the called program, for UNIX com-
patibility.

The Functions
fexeclO is useful when a fixed number of arguments must be
passed, and fexecvO is useful when a variable number of
arguments must be passed.

Other Information
The fexec functions load the called functions after the calling
program in memory.
Files opened for unbuffered I/O in the calling program will
also be open in the called program, and will have the same file
descriptors.
Files opened for standard 1/ 0 in the calling program won't be
open for standard I/O in the called program, although they
will be open for unbuffered I/O. Thus, before a program
activates another using an fexec function, it should cause the
buffered data for files opened for standard I/O to be written
to disk, using either the fcloseO or fflushO functions.
The standard input, standard output, and standard error
devices are open in the called program to the same devices or
files as in the calling program. For the reasons discussed above,
care is needed when either the calling or the called program
accesses these logical devices'using standard I/O calls.
The environment of the called program is the same as that of
the calling program.
                                   Aztec C            Manual



See Also   The exec functions also load programs. Since they overlay the
           calling program, they allow a larger program to be loaded.
           They never return to the caller.


Errors     If an exec function fails, it returns -1 as its value after setting a
           code in the global integer errno. These codes are defined in the
           Errors Section of the Library Overview Chapter.
                                         Functions



TYPE             fflush (C) - Standard I/O                                 ANSI


NAME             fflush - flush an I/O stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int fflush (FILE *stream)i

DESCRIPTION fflushO is used to explicitly flush an I/O stream of any data in
                 its buffers which has not yet been written to the file or device
                 associated with the stream. fflushO is automatically called by
                 fcloseO and also any write operation which outputs an end-of-
                 line sequence or causes the stream's buffer to overflow.


SEE ALSO         fclaseO, fopenO


DIAGNOSTICS If fflushO is successful, it returns O. If a write error occurs, it
            returns EOF. If stream is NULL, all streams are flushed.




                                                 fflush (C) - Standard I/O
                                       Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE             fgetc (0 - Standard 110                                  ANSI


NAME             fgetc - return the next available character from a standard I/O
                 stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int fgetc (FILE *stream);


DESCRIPTION fgetcO returns the next character available from stream and
            advances the stream's file position by 1. The character is
                 returned as an unsigned char promoted to an int. This function
                 is identical to getcO, except that it is implemented as a true
                 function rather than a macro.


SEE ALSO         fopenO, fc1oseO, agetcO, getcO, getcharO


DIAGNOSTICS If an error occurs during the read operation, or if the end-of-file
                 is reached, fgetcO will return EOF. The functions feofO and
                 ferrorO may be used to distinguish between a true error and
                 end-of-file.




    fgetc (C) - Standard 1/0
                                         Functions



TYPE           fgetpos (C) - Standard I/O                                    ANSI


NAME           fgetpos - save the current file position for a stream


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                 int fgetpos (FILE *stream, fpos_+ *pos);

DESCRIPTION fgetposO saves the current file position indicator for the
               specified stream into the object pointed to by pas. The value
               stored in pas is suitable for use by the fgetposO function to
               reposition the stream.
               fgetposO returns 0 if successful. If it is not successful, it returns
               a non-zero value or sets an error code in the global integer
               ermo.


SEE ALSO       ftellO, fseekO, fsetposO




                                               fgetpos (e) - Standard I/O
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            fgets (C) - Standard I/O                                  ANSI


NAME            fgets - get a string of characters from a stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   char "'fgets (char "'s, int n, FILE "'stream);


DESCRIPTION fgetsO reads in a string of characters from the specified stream.
                fgetsO will place characters from stream into the array pointed
                to by s until n-l characters are read, a newline-sequence is
                reached, or the end-of-file is encountered. If a newline is
                reached, it is included in the string. fgetsO will terminate the
                string with a null. The pointer s is returned by fgetsO if no
                errors occur.


SEE ALSO        ferrorO


DIAGNOSTICS If end-of-file is encountered before any characters are read, the
                array pointed to by s is left unchanged, and a null pointer is
                returned. If a read error occurs, the array's contents should not
                be considered valid, and a null pointer is also returned. The
                ferrorO and feofO functions may be used to distinguish be-
                tween an error and end-of-file.




    fgets (C) - Standard I/O
                                        Functions



TYPE            fileno (C) - UNIX liD                                      Aztec


NAME            fileno - return file descriptor associated with a stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int fileno (FILE ""stream);


DESCRIPTION filenoO returns the low-level file descriptor associated with the
                specified stream. The file descriptor can then be used with the
                unbuffered I/O functions (openO, readO, etc.)


SEE ALSO        feofO, ferrorO, clearerrO, perrorO




                                                      fileno (C) - UNIX 1/0
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            floor (M) - Float Math                                    ANSI


NAME            floor - compute the largest integer not greater than a specified
                number


SYNOPSIS          #include <math.h>
                  double floor (double x)j


DESCRIPTION floorO returns the largest integral value not greater than the
            input parameter x. This return value is expressed as a double.
            For example, floorO would return 5.0 if passed 5.3, and -6.0 if
            passed -5.3.


SEE ALSO        fabsO, ceilO




    floor (M) - Float Math
                                 Library Functions



TYPE             £mod (M) - Float Math                                    ANSI


NAME             £mod - return the remainder of the double value x/y


SYNOPSIS           #include <math.h>
                   double fmod (double x, double y);

DESCRIPTION £modO calculates the double value x modulo y. The exact
            remainder, called f, is calculated so that x = iy + f for an integer
            i, and O<f<y.


SEE ALSO         ceilO, flo orO, modfO




                                                     fmod (M) - Float Math
                                        Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            fopen (C) - Standard I/O                                       ANSI


NAME            fopen - open a specified file or device for standard I/O access


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  FILE "fop en (const char "filename, const
                  char "mode);


DESCRIPTION fopenO is used to prepare, or "open", the device or file pointed
                to by filename for access by the standard I/O functions. Once
                opened by fopenO, a file or device is referred to as a stream.
                If the device or file is successfully opened, fopenO returns a
                pointer, called a file pointer, to a structure of type FILE. This file
                pointer is then taken as a parameter by functions such as getcO
                or putcO to read from, write to, and generally access the stream.
                The first parameter to fopenO is a pointer to the name of the
                device or file you want to open.
                The other parameter passed to fopenO, mode, specifies how the
                file or device is to be accessed. The mode parameter defines two
                important variables concerning stream accessibility:
                read/write access and text/binary access.
                 • Read / wri te accessibili ty determines whether the file may be
                   read from, written to, or both. Also, the initial position
                   within the file upon opening, and course of action if the file
                   does not exist, may be defined.
                  • Text/binary access determines whether the stream should
                    be interpreted as a series of "lines" (text mode), or as raw data
                    (binary mode). In text mode, there is no guarantee of a
                    correspondence between the number of characters written
                    or read and the actual position within the file, due to possible
                    end-of-line sequence translation and other possible altera-
                    tions. In binary mode, however, there is a 1:1 correspon-
                    dence between characters read and the position in a file.



     fopen (e) - Standard 1/0
               Library Functions



As their names suggest, text mode is appropriate for handling
straight text input in a portable manner, whereas binary mode
deals with an unaltered data stream.
mode points to a character string terminated by a null that
specifies the stream's accessibility. The various modes and
their meanings are:
Mode           Meaning
a              Open text stream for appending. If the file
               exists, it is positioned one character past the
               last character in the file. If the file does not exist,
               it is created. In both cases, the file is opened as
               write-only.
ab             Same as a, except the stream is opened as bi-
               nary.
a+             Same as a, except the stream may also be read
               from.
a+b or ab+     Same as a+, except the stream is opened as
               binary.
r              Open text stream for reading only. If a file is
               opened, it is positioned at the first character in
               it. If the file or device does not exist, NULL is
               returned.
rb             Same as r, except the stream is opened as bi-
               nary.
r+             Same as r, but the stream may also be written
               to.
r+b orrb+      Same as r+, except the stream is opened as
               binary.
w              Open a text stream for writing only. If a file is
               opened which already exists, it is truncated to
               zero length. If the file does not exist, it is created
               with a length of O.




                                 fopen (e) - Standard 1/0
                           Aztec C Library Manual



         wb           Same as w, except the stream is opened as
                      binary.
         w+           Same as w, except the stream may also be read
                      from.
         w+b or wb+   Same as W+, except the stream is opened as
                      binary.




fopen (C) - Standard 1/0
                                      Functions



TYPE           format (C) - Conversion                                Aztec


NAME           format - write formatted data using a user-defined output
               function


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                 int format (int (*fund 0,
                    const char *fmt, va_list varg);

DESCRIPTION formatO is used to write formatted ASCII data by calling the
               function June repeatedly with characters. June should take as
               an argument a single character, which is a character to be
               output.
               The fmt string should have the same format as the function
               printfO. In fact, printfO could be implemented as:
                  return (for.mat (putchar, fmt,          &args);
               See the printfO function for a full description of formatO's
               con version process.


SEE ALSO       va_startO, printfO




                                              format (C) - Conversion
                                      Aztec C          Manual



TYPE            fprintf (C, M) - Standard liD                            ANSI


NAME            fprintf - write formatted data to an I/O stream


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int £printf (FILE "stream, const char
                  "fmt, .. J;

DESCRIPTION fprintfO is used to write formatted ASCII data to the specified
                stream. The fmt string specifies the exact output to stream and
                also determines the number of additional arguments that are
                required. See the printfO function for complete details on the
                £mtO string.


SEE ALSO        printfO, formatO, sprintfO




    fprintf (e, M) - Standard 1/0
                                Library Functions



TYPE            fpute (C) - Standard 110                                  ANSI


NAME            fpute - write a character to an I/O stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int fpute (int c, FILE "stream);

DESCRIPTION fputeO takes the character c and writes it to the specified I/O
            stream. Unless an 1/ 0 error occurs, fputeO returns c. If an error
                does occur, fputeO returns EOP. fputeO is identical to the puteO
                function.


SEE ALSO        puteharO, puteO


DIAGNOSTICS fputeO returns EOP if an error occurs. The actual error code is
                 placed in errno.




                                                 fputc (C) - Standard 1/0
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           fputs (0 - Standard I/O                                      ANSI


NAME           fputs - write a string to an I/O stream


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int fputs (const char *str, FILE *stream);

DESCRIPTION fputsO writes the null-terminated character string pointed to
               by str to the specified stream. The terminating null in str is not
               written. Unlike putsO, fputsO does not write a "\n" at the end
               of the string. If fputsO is successful, it returns a positive value.
               If an error does occur, fputsO returns EOP.


DIAGNOSTICS EOF is returned by fputsO if an error occurs, with the error
               code set in errno.




    fputs (C) - Standard I/O
                               Library Functions



TYPE           fread (C) - Standard liD                                   ANSI


NAME           fread - read from a specified standard 1/ 0 stream


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  size_t fread {void *buffer, size_t size,
                  size_t count, FILE *stream)i


DESCRIPTION freadO is used to read one or more characters from stream.
               freadO will place into the buffer pointed to by buffer up to count
               items, with each item of size size. The position indicator for
               stream is advanced by the number of characters that were
               successfully read. freadO returns as its value the number of
               items (count if no errors occurred) successfully read from the
               stream, not the number of characters.
               See the fwriteO function for an example that uses freadO.


SEE ALSO       fwriteO


DIAGNOSTICS freadO returns a or a number less than count upon end-of-file
               or error. The functions feofO and ferrorO can be used to distin-
               guish between the two.




                                                 fread (C) - Standard I/O
                                     Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE          free (C) - Memory Allocation                               ANSI


NAME          free - deallocate a memory block


SYNOPSIS        #include <stdlib.h>
                void free (void *ptr>;


DESCRIPTION freeO deallocates a block of memory which was previously
              reserved with the mallocO, ImallocO, callocO, or reallocO
              functions. This allows the space pointed at by ptr to be used in
              later attempts to allocate memory. If ptr is a null pointer, freeO
              does nothing. If ptr does not point to a block previously allo-
              cated by mallocO, callocO, or reallocO, or has already been
              de-allocated by a call to freeO, the results are unpredictable.


SEE ALSO      mallocO, callocO, reallocO, ImallocO




    free (C) - Memory Allocation
                              Library Functions



TYPE           freeseg (0 - Amiga                                     Amiga


NAME           freeseg - segment unload function


SYNOPSIS         void freeseg (int (*fund 0 );

DESCRIPTION freesegO is used with segmented (overlay) programs to unload
               a segment that is no longer needed but is occupying memory.
               The parameter Junc is the name of any function in the segment.
               The segment may have been automatically loaded by a func-
               tion call or explicitly loaded with the segloadO function.


SEE ALSO       segloadO




                                                   freeseg (C) - Amiga
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           freopen (0 - Standard 110                               ANSI


NAME           freopen - reopen a stream with a new device


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                 FILE *freopen (const char *filename,
                    const char *mode, FILE *stream)i


DESCRIPTION freopenO is used to substitute the name or device originally
               associated with stream with the new file or device filename.
               freopenO closes the original file or device and returns stream
               as its value. freopenO is most often used to associate new
               devices or files to the pre-opened streams stdin, stdout, and
               stderr. In all other respects freopenO is the same as fopenO.


SEE ALSO       fopenO


EXAMPLE          #inc1ude <stdio.h>
                 main ()
                  {
                      FILE *fp;

                      fp = freopen ("dskfi1e",
                      "w+" , stdout);
                      printf ("This message
                      is going to dskfi1e\n");




    freopen (C) - Standard 1/0
                              Library Functions



TYPE          frexp (M) - Float Math                                  ANSI


NAME          frexp - decompose a floating point number


SYNOPSIS        #include <math.h>
                double frexp (double value, int *exp);


DESCRIPTION frexpO breaks a floating point number into its component
              mantissa and exponent. Given value, frexpO places the ex-
              ponent-portion of value into the buffer pointed to by exp, and
              returns the mantissa component.


SEE ALSO      IdexpO, modfO




                                                  frexp (M) - Float Math
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           fscanf (C,M) - Standard I/O                            ANSI


NAME           fscanf - perform formatted input conversion on a specified
               stream


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int fscanf (FILE "stream, const char "fmt,
                    ••• )i

DESCRIPTION fscanfO is equivalent to the scanfO function, with the excep-
               tion that input is read from the specified stream rather than
               fromstdin.


SEE ALSO       scanfO, sscanfO




    fscanf (C,M) - Standard I/O
                                 Library Functions



TYPE            fseek (C) - Standard 110                                    ANSI


NAME            fseek - reposition current location within a stream


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int fseek (FILE ""stream, long int offset,
                    int origin);


DESCRIPTION fseekO sets the current position within a file opened for stand-
            ard I/O. stream is the stream which is to be repositioned. The
                exact operation of fseekO differs depending on whether the
                file was opened in binary or text mode.
                If the file was opened in binary mode, the new position,
                measured in characters from the beginning of the file, is ob-
                tained by adding the requested offset to the position specified
                by origin. origin may have the following values:
                 • SEEK_SET - offset from the beginning of the file.
                 • SEEK_CUR - offset from the current position in the file.
                 • SEEK_END - offset from the end of the file.
                Offset may be positive or negative.
                If the file was opened for text mode, the use of fseekO is
                restricted. Either offset must equal 0, or offset must be a value
                previously returned by ftellO, with origin set to SEEK_SET.
                fseekO will clear the end-of-file indicator for the stream and
                undo the effects of ungetcO calls if successful.


SEE ALSO        lseekO, ftellO


DIAGNOSTICS fseekO returns       °
                                if it is successful. If an error occurs, it returns
                a nonzero value and sets the appropriate code in ermo.



                                                  fseek (C) - Standard 1/0
                                Aztec C Library Manual



EXAMPLE     The following routine is equivalent to opening a file in a+
            mode:
              #include <stdio.h>
              main ()

                 FILE *fopen(), *fp;
                 if «fp = fopen("filel",
                 "r+"»   == NULL)
                 fp = fopen ("filel", "w+");
                 fseek (fp, OL, 2);
                    /* position 1 byte past
                    last character */
                 fwrite ("did the seek",13,1,fp);
                 fclose (fp);




   fseek (C) - Standard I/O
                                 Library Functions



TYPE            fsetpos (0 - Standard liD                                   ANSI


NAME            fsetpos - set the correct file position for a stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int fsetpos (FILE "stream, const fpos_t
                     "pos);

DESCRIPTION fsetposO sets the file position indicator for the specified stream
                according to the value contained in the object pointed to by pas.
                pas should be the value obtained by a previous fgetposO call.
                 A successful call to fsetposO will clear the end-of-file indicator
                 for the stream as well as the effects of the unsetcO function on
                 the stream. On success, fsetposO returns zero. If an error occurs,
                 it returns a non-zero value and sets an error code in the global
                 integer ermo.


SEE ALSO         ftellO, fseekO, fgetposO




                                               fsetpos (C) - Standard 1/0
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            ftell (C) - Standard I/O                                  ANSI


NAME            ftell - return the current file position within a standard I/O
                stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   long ftell (FILE *stream)i


DESCRIPTION ftellO returns the current position within the specified stream.
                For binary streams, this represents the number of characters
                from the beginning of the file. For text streams, the number
                returned by ftellO may only be meaningfully used by the
                fseekO function. ftellO calls on a text stream do not necessarily
                reflect a measure of characters read or written to the stream.


SEE ALSO         fseekO, lseekO, fgetposO


DIAGNOSTICS ftellO returns -lL if an error occurs and places the error code
            in ermo. If ftellO is successful, it returns the current file posi-
                 tion.




    ftell (C) - Standard I/O
                                Library Functions



TYPE            ftoa (M) - Conversion                                     Aztec


NAME            ftoa - convert floating point number to an ASCII string


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdlib.h>
                   void £loa (double val, char *buf,
                      int precision, int type);


DESCRIPTION ftoa() converts a double-precision floating point number into
            an ASCII string. The parameter val is the number to be con-
            verted, and but is the buffer where the string is to be placed. It
                is your responsibility to ensure that the area pointed to by but
                is sufficiently large to handle the ASCII representation of val.
                The predsion and type parameters control the format used to
                convert the number. predsion is used to specify the number of
                digits to be shown to the right of the decimal point. type
                specifies the printf-like format used: 0 for "E" format, 1 for "F"
                format, and 2 for "G" format. See the description of the printfO
                function for the details of these format specifiers.


EXAMPLE            #include <stdio.h>
                   #include <stdlib.h>
                   main ()
                   {
                       double val;
                       val = 5.75;
                       ftoa (val, buf, 2, 0);
                       printf (nbuf = %s\nn, buf);


SEEALSO          atofO, atoiO, atolO




                                                    ftoa (M) - Conversion
                                       Aztec C            Manual



TYPE            fwrite (0 - Standard liD                                    ANSI


NAME            fwrite - write to a specified standard I/O stream


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  size_t fwrite (const void *buf, size_t
                      size, size_t count, FILE *stream)i

DESCRIPTION fwriteO is used to write one or more characters to stream.
                fwriteO takes up to count items, each of size size, from the buffer
                pointed to by buf. The file position indicator for stream is
                advanced by the number of characters that were successfully
                written.


SEE ALSO        freadO


DIAGNOSTICS If a write error occurs, fwriteO will return a number less than
                count and set an error code in errno.

EXAMPLE         This is the code for reading ten integers from file 1 (see
                freadO for more information) and writing them again to file
                2. It includes a simple check that there are enough two-byte
                items in the first file:
                  #include <stdio.h>

                  main ()
                   {
                       FILE, *fpl, *fp2;
                       char buf[SO];
                       int size, count, i;




    fwrite (C) - Standard 1/0
          Library Functions



size = 2;
count = 10;
for (i = 0; i < 50; i++)
   buf[i] = '\0';
if «fp1 = fopen ("file1",
"r"»   == NULL)
  printf ("You asked me
  to open file1") ;
  printf ("but I can't\n");

if «fp2   = fopen("file2",
"w"»   == NULL)
  printf ("You asked me to
  open file2");
  printf ("but I can't\n");



if (fread(buf, size, count, fp
1) != count)
   printf ("Not enough integers
in file1 \n");
fwrite(buf, size, count, fp2);
fclose (fp1);
fclose (fp2);




                        fwrite (C) - Standard 1/0
                                        Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            geta4 (C) - Amiga                                        Amiga


NAME            geta4 - set up a4 register


SYNOPSIS           void geta4 (void);

DESCRIPTION geta40 sets up the a40 register that is used as the base address-
            ing register for the small code and data models. It need only be
                called as the very first item in a newly created task or process.

                If the code for the geta40 function is physically 32K away from
                the initial task code, the call to geta40 will not work. In this
                case, you should either try to place the geta40 routine within
                32K of the task code, or compile the task code with the large
                code option -me.




    geta4 (C) - Amiga
                                Library Functions



TYPE             getc (C) - Standard 110                                 ANSI


NAME             getc - return the next available character from a standard I/O
                 stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int getc (FILE "stream);


DESCRIPTION getd) returns the next character available from stream and
            advances the stream's file position by 1. The character is
                 returned as an unsigned char promoted to an into The getcO
                 function is identical to fgetcO, except getcO is defined as a
                 macro.


SEE ALSO         fopenO, £CloseO, agetcO, fgetd), getcharO


DIAGNOSTICS If an error occurs during the read operation, or if the end-of-file
            is reached, getcO returns EOF. The functions feofO and ferrorO
                 may be used to distinguish between a true error and end-of-
                 file.




                                                  getc (C) - Standard I/O
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            getchar (C) - Standard liD                                 ANSI


NAME            getchar - return the next available character from stdin


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int getchar (void);


DESCRIPTION getcharO returns the next character from the standard input
            stream, stdin. It is equivalent to the call getdstdin).


SEE ALSO         getcO, fgetcO, fopenO, fcloseO, agetcO, putcO


DIAGNOSTICS If an error occurs during the read operation, or if the end-of-file
            is reached, getcharO returns EOP. The functions feofO and
                 ferrorO may be used to distinguish between the two cases.




    getchar (C) - Standard 1/0
                                Library Functions



TYPE            getenv (C) - Miscellaneous                               ANSI


NAME            getenv - get value of environment variable


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  char *getenv (const char *name)i

DESCRIPTION getenvO returns a pointer to the character string associated
            with the environment variable name, or a null pointer if the
            variable is not in the environment. If the name cannot be found,
                a null pointer is returned.
                The character string is in a dynamically-allocated buffer; this
                buffer will be released when the next call is made to getenvO.
                See the Library Overview chapter for information on environ-
                ment variables.


DIAGNOSTICS If the specified name cannot be found within the environment,
                a null pointer is returned.




                                              getenv (C) - Miscellaneous
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            gets (C) - Standard 110                                   ANSI


NAME            gets - get a string of characters from stdin


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  char ""gets (char ""bUf)i


DESCRIPTION getsO reads a string of characters from the standard input
                stream, stdin, into the array pointed to by buf. getsO reads in
                characters from stdin until either a newline sequence or the
                end-of-file is encountered. The newline sequence, if en-
                countered, is discarded, and a null is written immediately after
                the last character. This differs from the operation of the fgetsO
                function, which preserves the new line. getsO returns but if no
                errors occur.


SEe ALSO        ferrorO, fgetsO, feofO


DIAGNOSTICS If end-of-file is encountered before any characters are read, the
                array pointed to by but is left unchanged, and a null pointer is
                returned. If an error occurs, the array's contents should be
                treated as invalid, and a null pointer is returned. The ferrorO
                and feofO functions may be used to distinguish between an
                error and the end-of-file.




    gets (C) - Standard I/O
                              Library Functions



TYPE           gmtime (C) - Time                                    ANSI


NAME           gmtime - convert a calendar time into coordinated universal
               time


SYNOPSIS          #include <time.h>
                  struct tm *gmtime (const time_t *timer);

DESCRIPTION gmtimeO converts a time value in time_t format into struct tm
               format. The conversion is expressed relative to Greenwich
               mean time.


SEE ALSO       localtimeO, ctimeO, asctimeO, timeO




                                                     gmtime (C) - Time
                                       Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            index (C) - String Handling                                Aztec


NAME            index - find the first occurrence of a character in a string


SYNOPSIS          #include <string.h>
                  char *index (char *str, char c)i


DESCRIPTION The indexO function returns a pointer to the first occurrence of
            c within the string pointed to by str. If the character is not
                found, then null is returned.
                indexO is not supported by ANSI and generally is not a port-
                able function. For this reason the equivalent ANSI function
                strchrO should be used whenever possible.


SEE ALSO        strchrO, strrchrO, rindexO




    index (C) - String Handling
                              Library Functions



TYPE           inCend (0 - Amiga                                      Amiga


NAME           inCend - restore machine state from within a C interrupt
               handler


SYNOPSIS          void inCend(void)i


DESCRIPTION inCendO is used to restore the machine registers saved by the
               inCstartO function from within a C interrupt handler routine.
               Calling inCendO is equivalent to the following inline assembly
               code:
                  #asm
                    movem.l (Sp)+, d2/d3/d4
                  #endasm
               inCen dO must be the very last line within the C interrupt
               handling function.


SEE ALSO       inCstartO




                                                    int_end (C) - Amiga
                                     Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           inCstart (0 - Amiga                                     Amiga


NAME           int_start - set up a function as an interrupt handler


SYNOPSIS         void inCstart (void);


DESCRIPTION inCstartO is used in conjunction with the function inCendO
               to enable a standard C routine to be used as an interrupt
               handler. Specifically, int_startO saves the d2 and d3 data
               registers and the a4 address register, as well as calling the
               geta40 function. This ensures that the C routine does not
               destroy any register values and also that it can address its
               global variables properly.
               The inCstartO routine is equivalent to the following in-line
               assembly code:
                 #asm
                    movem.l D2/D3/A4, -(sp)
                    JSR geta4#
                 #endasm
               inCstartO must be the very first line from within an interrupt
               routine to guarantee that it will work properly.


SEE ALSO       inCendO




    int_start (e) - Amiga
                                        Functions



TYPE            ioctl (c) - UNIX liD                                   Amiga


NAME            ioctl- device I/O utility


SYNOPSIS          #include <sgtty.h>
                  ioctl (int fd, int cmd, struct sgttyb
                       *stty);

DESCRIPTION The Amiga version of ioctlO performs only one function: It can
                set or reset RAW mode on the selected I/O console device.
                ioctlO is only valid under Version 1.2 or greater of the Amiga
                operating system.




                                                      ioetl (C) - UNIX 1/0
                                         Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE             is ... (C) - Character Type                                  ANSI


NAME             isalpha, isupper, islower, isdigit, isalnum, isspace, ispunct,
                 isprint, iscntrl, isascii, isgraph, isxdigit - character classifica-
                 tion functions


SYNOPSIS            #include <ctype.h>
                    int isalpha (int c);


DESCRIPTION These functions test a character value to check if it is of a certain
            type. If isasciiO is true for C, then non-zero (true) will be
                 returned under the following conditions:
                 isalphaO     c is a letter
                 isupperO     c is an uppercase letter
                 islowerO     c is a lowercase letter
                 isdigitO      c is a digit
                 isalnumO      c is an alphanumeric character
                 isspaceO      c is a space, tab, carriage return, newline, form
                               feed or vertical tab
                  ispunctO     c is a punctuation character
                  isprintO     c is a printing character, valued Ox20 (space)
                               through Ox7e (tilde)
                  iscntrlO     c is a delete character (Oxff) or ordinary control
                               character (value less than Ox20)
                  isasciiO     is an ASCII character, code less than Ox100
                  isgraphO     tests for any printing character except a space


                  isxdigitO    tests for any hexadecimal digit character 0-9, a-f,
                               A-F


     is ... (C) - Character Type
                          Library Functions



           Otherwise, a zero (false) is returned. These functions are im-
           plemented as both true functions and as macros. By default,
           functions are used. If you want to use the macro versions to
           improve performance you should either:
            • #define _C_MACROS_ before including ctype.h
           or
            • compile with the -sm or -so options


SEE ALSO   toupperO, tolowerO




                                         is ... (C) - Character Type
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            labs (C) - Integer Math                               ANSI


NAME            labs - return the absolute value of a signed long


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  long int labs (Iong int x);

DESCRIPTION lab sO returns the absolute value of the signed long x.


SEE ALSO        absO




    labs (C) - Integer Math
                                        Functions



TYPE            Idexp(M) - Float Math                                    ANSI


NAME            Idexp - multiplies a floating point number by an integral power
                of 2


SYNOPSIS          #include <math.h>
                  double ldexp(double X, int exp)


DESCRIPTION The ldexp function returns the value of x times 2 raised to the
                powerexp.




                                                  Idexp(M) - Float Math
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           ldiv (C) - Integer Math                               ANSI


NAME           ldiv - compute the quotient and remainder of the division of
               two longs


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  ldiv_t ldiv (long int numerator,
                  long int denominatorh

DESCRIPTION The IdivO function divides two signed long integers and
            retains both the quotient and remainder as a type Idiv_t. The
            ldiv_t type is defined in the stdlib.h header file as being:
                  typede£ struct {
                     long int quot;
                     long int rem;
                  };


SEE ALSO       divO




    Idiv (C) - Integer Math
                                  Library Functions



TYPE            localtime (C) - Time                                      ANSI


NAME            loealtime - convert a time value relative to local time


SYNOPSIS          #include <time.h>
                  struct tm "'localtime (const time_t "'timer);

DESCRIPTION localtimeO converts the time value contained in timer and
            converts it into tm format. The conversion is done relative to
                the local time.


SEE ALSO        gmtimeO, etimeO, asctimeO, timeO




                                                      localtime (C) - Time
                                      Aztec C       Manual



TYPE           log (M) - Float Math                               ANSI


NAME           log - compute the natural logarithm of a number


SYNOPSIS         #include <math.h>
                 double log(double x);


DESCRIPTION logO returns as its value the natural logarithm of the input
               numberx.


SEE ALSO       expO, loglOO, powO, sqrtO


DIAGNOSTICS If the input parameter x is negative, log returns -HUGE_VAL
            and sets ermo to EDOM. If the input value is 0, -HUGE_VAL
               is returned and errno is set to ERANGE.
               Error codes:
               condition         return value            errno
               x==o              -HUGE_VAL               ERANGE
               x<o               -HUGE_VAL               EDOM




    log (M) - Float Math
                               Library Functions



TYPE           log10 (M) - Float Math                                 ANSI


NAME           log10 - compute the logarithm of a number to base 10


SYNOPSIS            #include <math.h>
                    double log10 {double X)i


DESCRIPTION log10 returns the logarithm to base 10 of the input parameter
               x.

SEE ALSO       expO, logO, powO, sqrtO


DIAGNOSTICS If the input parameter x is negative, log100 will return
            -HUGE_VAL and set errno equal to ENOM. If the inpu t value
            x is 0, -HUGE_VAL is returned, and errno is set to ERANGE.
               Error codes:
               condition          return value            ermo
               x==o               -HUGE_VAL               ERANGE
               x<O                -HUGE_VAL               EDOM




                                                   log10 (M) - Float Math
                                        Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            longjmp (0 - Miscellaneous                                      ANSI


NAME            longjmp - execute a non-local goto


SYNOPSIS          #include <setjmp.h>
                  void longjmp (jmp_buf env, int retvan;

DESCRIPTION A call to the longjmpO function restores the stack and register
                state saved in the last call to setjmpO with the argument env,
                and then executes a return which makes it appear that setjmpO
                returned the value retval.
                It is crucial that setjmpO be called with env before any
                longjmpO calls occur. If setjmpO is not called with env before
                the first longjmpO, then the results are completely unpre-
                dictable and could cause serious problems.
                After completion of the longjmpO call, program execution will
                continue as if the corresponding setjmpO call had returned
                retval. If retval is set to 0, then it will be forced to zero so as not
                                      °
                to conflict with the returned by the initial call to setjmpO.


SEE ALSO        setjmpO




    longjrnp (C) - Miscellaneous
                                  Library Functions



TYPE            lseek (0 - UNIX 110                                    Aztec/UNIX


NAME            lseek - change current position within file


SYNOPSIS           long int lseek Ont fd, long offset,
                   int origin)i

DESCRIPTION IseekO sets the current position of a file that opened for unbuf-
                fered I/O. This position determines where the next character
                will be read or written.
                fd is the file descriptor associated with the file. The current
                position is set to the location specified by the offset and origin
                parameters, as follows:
                 • If origin is 0, the current position is set to offset bytes from the
                   beginning of the file.
                 • If origin is I, the current position is set to the current position
                   plus offset.
                 • If origin is 2, the current position is set to the end of the file
                   plus offset.
                The offset can be positive or negative, to position after or before
                the specified origin, respectively. If lseekO is used on a file
                opened as text, only an offset of 0 may be used.
                If IseekO is successful, it returns the new position in the file (in
                bytes from the beginning of the file).


DIAGNOSTICS If IseekO fails, it returns -1 as its value and sets an error code
            in the global integer ermo. errno is set to EBADF if the file
            descriptor is invalid. It will be set to EINVAL if the offset
            parameter is invalid or if the requested position is before the
                beginning of the file.




                                                          Iseek (C) - UNIX 1/0
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



EXAMPLES     1. To seek to the beginning of a file:
               lseek(fd, OL, 0);
             IseekO returns the value zero (0) since the current position in
             the file is character (or byte) number zero.


             2. To seek to the character following the last character in the
             file:
               pos = lseek(fd, OL, 2);
             The variable pos contains the current position of the end-of-
             file, plus one.


             3. To seek backward five bytes:
                lseek(fd, -SL, 1);
             The third parameter, 1, sets the origin at the current position
             in the file. The offset is - 5 . The new position is the origin plus
             the offset. So the effect of this call is to move backward a total
             of five characters.


             4. To skip five characters when reading in a file:
                read (fd, buf, count);
                lseek(fd, SL, 1);
                read (fd, buf, count);




   Iseek (C) - U NIX I/O
                                Library Functions



TYPE            malloc (C) - Memory Allocation                             ANSI


NAME            malloc - allocate a block of system memory


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdlib.h>
                   void *malloc (size_t size);


DESCRIPTION mallocO allocates a block of memory size bytes long. The block
                is allocated from an area in system memory called the "heap".
                See the Library Overview chapter for a description of how the
                heap is used.
                The memory allocation done by mallocO is called "dynamic
                allocation," because the amount of memory to be reserved for
                storage is determined dynamically at runtime, rather than
                being fixed at compile time. The storage returned from mal-
                locO should not be assumed to have been initialized to any
                particular value, 0 or otherwise.
                If the allocation is successful, mallocO returns a pointer to the
                requested block.


SEE ALSO        callocO, reallocO, freeO, ImallocO


DIAGNOSTICS If mallocO cannot allocate the requested size block, it returns a
                null pointer. Otherwise, a pointer to the requested block is
                returned.




                                       malloc (C) - Memory Allocation
                                     Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            memchr (C) - Block Operation                           ANSI


NAME            memchr - find a character within an object


SYNOPSIS           #include <string.h>
                   void *memchr (const void *obj,        int c,
                    size_t n)i

DESCRIPTION memchrO searches the first n bytes in the object pointed to by
            obj for the character c. If c is found, memchrO returns a pointer
                to it. Otherwise, a NULL pointer is returned.


SEE ALSO        strrchrO, strchrO




    memchr (C) - Block Operation
                               Library Functions



TYPE           memcmp (0 - Block Operation                                 ANSI


NAME           memcmp - compare two blocks of memory n bytes long


SYNOPSIS         #include <string.h>
                 int memcmp (const void *blkl,
                 const void *blk2, size_t n)i

DESCRIPTION The memcmpO function compares the first n characters in the
               object pointed to by blkl with the first n characters in the object
               pointed to by blk2. memcmpO returns a positive number,
               negative number, or zero, depending on whether blkl is greater
               than, less than, or equal to blk2.


SEE ALSO       strcmpO, strncmpO, strcollO




                                      memcmp (C) - Block Operation
                                      Aztec C          Manual



TYPE            memcpy (C) - Block Operation                            ANSI


NAME            memcpy - copy a block of bytes from one object to another


SYNOPSIS           #include <string.h>
                   void *memcpy void *dest, const void *src,
                    size_t n)i

DESCRIPTION memcpyO copies the first n bytes from the object pointed to by
            5rc into the object pointed to by dest. The two objects should not
                overlap. memcpyO returns dest.


SEE ALSO        memmoveO, strcopyO, stmcpyO




    memcpy (C) - Block Operation
                             Library Functions



TYPE         memmove (C) Block Operation                                 ANSI


NAME         memmove - copy a block of memory


SYNOPSIS       #include <string.h>
               void *memmove (void *dest, const void
                   *source, size_t n);


DESCRIPTION memmoveO copies a block of data from one location in
             memory to another location. memmoveO will copy n charac-
             ters from the object pointed to by source to the object pointed
             to by dest. memmoveO acts as if the data pointed to by source
             is first copied into a temporary buffer before moving it into dest.
             Therefore, overlapping blocks may be used with this function.
             memmoveO returns the value of dest.


SEE ALSO     memcpyO




                                    memmove (C) Block Operation
                                      Aztec C          Manual



TYPE            memset (0 - Block Operation                             ANSI


NAME            memset - set a block of memory to a specified value


SYNOPSIS           #include <string.h>
                   void memset (void *obj,      int c, size_t n)i

DESCRIPTION memsetO copies the value of c into the first n bytes of the object
            pOinted to by obj.


SEE ALSO        memcpyO, memcmpO




    memset (C) - Block Operation
                                 Library Functions



TYPE            mktemp (C) - UNIX 110                                         Amiga


NAME            mktemp - make a unique file name


SYNOPSIS          char *mktemp (char *template);

DESCRIPTION mktempO replaces the character string pointed at by template
               with the name of a nonexistent file and returns as its value a
               pointer to the string.
               The string pointed at by template should look like a filename
               whose last few characters are Xs with an optional imbedded
               period. mktempO replaces the Xs with a letter followed by the
               least significant digits of the starting address of its program's
               data segment. The letter will be between A and Z and will be
               chosen such that the resulting character string is not the name
               of an existing file.


DIAGNOSTICS For a given character string, mktempO will try to convert the
            string into one of 26 file names. If all of these files exist,
                mktempO will replace the first character pointed at by template
                with a null character.


SEE ALSO        tmpfileO, tmpnamO


EXAMPLES        The following program calls mktempO to get a character string
                that it can use as a filename. If the digits selected by mktempO
                are 1234, then the generated name will be one of the strings
                abcAOOl.234, abcBOOl.234, .. abcZOOl.234. If all the strings that
                mktempO considers are names of existing files, mktempO will
                replace the first character of the string passed to it, a in this case,
                with O.




                                                      mktemp (C) - UNIX I/O
                         Aztec C Library Manual



          #inc1ude <stdio.h>
          main()
          {
              char *fname, *mktemp();
              FILE *fp, fopen();
              fname=mktemp("abcXXX.XXX");
              if (! *fname) {
                 printf("mktemp fai1ed");
                 exit(l);
                e1se
                 fp=fopen(fname, "w");




mktemp (C) - UNIX 1/0
                             Library Functions



TYPE          mktime (C) - Time                                         ANSI


NAME          mktime - convert a time value between formats


SYNOPSIS        #includes <time.h>
                time_t mktime (struct tm *timeptr);

DESCRIPTION mktimeO translates a time value represented in struct tm
              format into time_t format. timeptr should be a pointer to the tm
              format time value, and the corresponding time_t value is
              returned by mktimeO. If timeptr is unconvertible, mktimeO
              returns (time_t) -1.


SEE ALSO      asctimeO, ctimeO, localtimeO, timeO




                                                      mktime (C) - Time
                                      Aztec C            Manual



TYPE            modf (M) - Float MaUl                                      ANSI


NAME            modf - break a floating point value into integral and fractional
                parts


SYNOPSIS          #include <math.h>
                  double modf (double val, double *iptr);


OEseR IPTION modfO breaks the floating point number val into its componen t
                integral (to the left of the decimal point) and fractional (to the
                right of the decimal point) components. The integral portion is
                stored in the buffer pointed to byiptr, and the fractional portion
                is returned as the return value of modfO.


SEE ALSO        frexpO,ldexpO




    modf (M) - Float Math
                                       Functions



TYPE           movmem(C) Block Operation                                Aztec

NAME           movmem - copy a memory block


SYNOPSIS          void mov.mem(source, dest, length)
                  void *source, *dest;
                  unsigned int length;

DESCRIPTION movmem copies length characters from the block of memory
               pointed to by source to the block of memory pointed to by dest.
               The effect of movmem is as if length bytes of source were
               copied to a distinct temporary area and then the temporary
               area copied to dest. movmem can thus be used to copy blocks
               of memory that overlap.


SEE ALSO       memcpy, memmove


APPLICATION movmem is provided for compatibility with other Manx C
NOTE        compiler products. It should not be used in new programs. The
               memmove function should be used instead.




                                       movmem(C} Block Operation
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            open (C) - UNIX 1/0                               Aztec/UNIX


NAME            open - open device or file for unbuffered I/O


SYNOPSIS          #include <fcntl.h>
                  open (char "'name, int mode);

DESCRIPTION openO opens a device or file for unbuffered I/O. It returns an
                integer value called a file descriptor which is used to identify
                the file or device in subsequent calls to unbuffered I/O func-
                tions.
                name is a pointer to a character string which is the name of the
                device or file to be opened.
                mode specifies how your program intends to access the file. The
                choices are as follows:

                Mode               Meaning
                O_RDONLY           read only
                O_WRONLY           write only
                O_RDWR             read and write
                O_CREAT            create file, then open it
                O_TRVNC            truncate file, then open it
                O_EXCL             cause openO to fail if file already exists;
                                   used with O_CREAT
                O_APPEND           position file for appending data

                These open modes are integer constants defined in the files
                fcntl.h. Although the true values of these constants can be used
                in a given call to openO, use of the symbolic names ensures
                compatibility with UNIX and other systems.
                The calling program must specify the type of access desired by
                including exactly one of O_RDONLY, O_WRONLY, and
                O_RDWR in the mode parameter. The three remaining values



     open (e) - UNIX 1/0
                                Library Functions



               are optional. They may be included by adding them to the mode
               parameter, as in the examples below.
               By default, the open fails if the file to be opened does not exist.
               To cause the file to be created when it does not already exist,
               specify the O_CREAT option. If O_EXCL is given in addition
               to 0_CREAT, the open will fail if the file already exists; other-
               wise, the file is created.
               If the O_TRUNC option is specified, the file will be truncated
               so that nothing is in it. The truncation is performed by simply
               erasing the file, if it exists, and then creating it. So it is not an
               error to use this option when the file does not exist.
               Note that when O_TRUNC is used, O_CREAT is not needed.
                 °
               If _APPEND is specified, the current position for the file (that
               is, the position at which the next data transfer will begin) is set
               to the end of the file.
               If openO does not detect an error, it returns an integer called a
               "file descriptor." This value is used to identify the open file
               during unbuffered I/O operations. The file descriptor is very
               different from the file pointer which is returned by fopenO for
               use with buffered I/O functions.


DIAGNOSTICS If open encounters an error, it returns -1 and sets the global
                integer errno to a symbolic value which identifies the error.


EXAMPLES        1. To open the file, testfile for read-only access:
                  fd = open ("testfile", O_RDONLY);
                If test file does not exist open returns -1 and sets errno to
                ENOENT.
                2. To open the file, testfile for read-write access:
                  fd   = open ("sub1", O_RDWR+O_CREAT);
               If the file does not exist, it will be created and then opened.




                                                         open (C) - UNIX I/O
                              Aztec C Library Manual



         3. The following program opens a file whose name is given on
         the command line. The file must not already exist.
           #include <stdio.h>
           #include <fcntl.h>
           #include <errno.h>
           main (argc, argv)
           char **argv;
           int argc;
           /* should add this declaration */
           {
               int fd;
               fd = open (argv[l),
               O_WRONLY+O_CREAT+O_EXCL);
               if (fd == -l){
               if (errno == EEXIST)
                 printf ("file already exists\n");
               else if (errno == ENOENT)
                  printf ("unable to open file \n");
               else
                  printf ("open error \n");

           else
             printf ("the file %s was
             opened\n", argv[l);
           close (fd);




open (C) - UNIX I/O
                                Library Functions



TYPE            perror (0 - Standard 110                                     ANSI


NAME            perror - print a system error message


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   void perror (const char *str>;

DESCRIPTION When an error occurs in one of the standard math or I/O
            library functions, an error number indicating which error oc-
            curred is written to the global integer ermo. The perrorO
            function is used to print an error message to the s tderrO stream
            which corresponds to the error indicated by ermo. The exact
            format of the message written to stderrO is:
                 • The string pointed at by str (only if str and the first character
                   it points to are not null) followed by a colon and a space.
                 • The system error message string followed by a new-line.
                On the Amiga, the possible values of ermo and their cor-
                responding error messages are:
                   Ermo Value message
                   0             Error 0
                   ENOENT        No such file or directory
                   E2BIG         Arg list too long
                   EBADF         Bad file descriptor
                   ENOMEM Not enough memory
                   EEXIST        File exists
                   EINVAL        Invalid argument
                   EN FILE       File table overflow
                   EM FILE       Too many open files
                   ENOTTY       Not a console


                                                 perror (C) - Standard 1/0
                            Aztec C Library Manual




           EACCESS   Pennission denied
           EIO       I/O error
           ENOSPC    No space left on device
           ERANGE    Result too large
           EDOM       Argument out of domain
           ENOEXEC Exec fonnat error
           EROFS      Read-only file system
           EXDEV      Cross-device rename
           EAGAIN     Nothing to read




perror (C) • Standard I/O
                                Library Functions



TYPE            pow (M) - Float Math                                    ANSI


NAME            pow - compute x to the yth power


SYNOPSIS           #include <math.h>
                   double pow (double x, double Y)i

DESCRIPTION Given two double precision numbers x and y, powO returns
            the value of x to the yth power (xY).


SEE ALSO        expO, logO, log100, sqrtO


DIAGNOSTICS If x = 0 and y::s; 0, ENOM is set for ermo and 0.0 is returned. If
                x < 0 and Y is not an integral value, EDOM is set for ermo and
                0.0 is returned.




                                                    pow (M) - Float Math
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           printf (C, M) - Standard I/O                            ANSI


NAME           printf - formatted output function


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                    int printf (const char *fmt, ... );

DESCRIPTION printfO is the C language's primary formatted-output func-
               tion. printfO takes a series of arguments, converts them to
               ASCII strings, and writes the formatted information to the
               stdout stream.

               The Format String
               The format string fmt must be present in every call to printfO.
               This string determines exactly what gets written to stdout and
               may contain two types of items, ordinary characters and con-
               version specifiers:
                • Ordinary characters are always copied verbatim to the out-
                  put stream.
                • Conversion specifiers direct printfO to take arguments from
                  printfO's argument list and format them. Conversion
                  specifiers always begin with a % character.

               Conversion Specifiers
               Conversion specifiers always take the following form:
                  % [flags] [width] [.precision] [size-mod]
                   type
               where
                • The optional flags field controls output justification, sign
                  characters on numerical values, prefixes on hex and octal
                  numbers, decimal points, and trailing blanks.




       printf (C, M) - Standard 1/0
                          Functions



 • The optional width field specifies the minimum number of
   characters to print (the field width), with padding done with
   blanks or zeros.
 • The optional precision field specifies either the minimum
   number of digits to be printed for integral types, or the
   number of characters after the decimal point to be printed
   for floating-point types.
 • The optional size-mod field specifies that the argument may
   be long, short, or unsigned.
 • The type field specifies the actual type of the argument that
   printfO will be converting, such as string, integer, double,
   etc.
Note that all of the above fields are optional except for type.
The following tables list the valid options for these fields. In
the table, integral types are considered to be char, int, long int,
short int, and unsigned versions of these types. Floating-point
types are float, double, and long double.

Flags Field
Character Effect on Conversion
              The result is left justified, with padding on the
              right with blanks. By default, when "-" is not
              specified, the result is right-justified with padding
              on the left with O's or blanks.
+             The result will always have a "_" or "+" prepended
              to it if it is a numeric conversion.
space         Positive numbers begin with a space instead of a
              + character, but negative values still have a
              prepended "-".
#             The argument is formatted using an alternate
              form from the usual conversion. For x or X types,
              a Ox or OX is used as a prefix to the argument. For
              o types, a 0 is always prepended to non-zero
              results. For e, E, and F types, the result will always


                            printf (C, M) - Standard I/O
                              Aztec C Library Manual



                     contain a decimal point, even when the number
                     has no numbers following the decimal point. G
                     and g types are also converted this way, with the
                     addition that trailing zeros are not removed.

       Width Field
       Character Effect or Conversion
       n             A minimum of n characters are output. If the
                     conversion has less than n characters, the field is
                     padded with blanks.
       ..            The width specifier is supplied in the argument
                     list before the actual conversion argument.

        Precision Field
        Character Effect on Conversion
        .n           A minimum of n characters will be provided in the
                     field for integral conversions (d, i, 0, u, x, X). For
                     floating-point conversions (e, E, f, g, G) n specifies
                     the number of digits after the decimal point. For
                     string conversions (s), n is the number of charac-
                     ters printed from the string.
                     This is the same as .n where n is O. No decimal
                     point is printed.
        ..           The precision is supplied in the argument list
                     before the actual conversion argument.

        Size-mod Field
        Character Effect on Conversion
        h            The argument should be taken as a short integer.
                     Valid only for integral conversion (d, i, 0, u, x, X).
                     The argument should be taken as a long int for
                     integral conversions (d, i, 0, u, x, X) and as a



printf (C, M) - Standard 1/0
                        Functions



             double for floating-point conversions (e, E, f, g,
             G).
L            The argument should be taken as a long double
             for floating-paint conversions (e, E, f, g, G).

Type Field
Character Argument Type Conversion
d            integral type     signed decimal integer (base 10)
             integral type     signed decimal integer
a            integral type     unsigned octal (base 8) integer
u            integral type     unsigned decimal integer (base
                               16)

x            integral type     unsigned hexadecimal integer
                               with lower case letters, i.e. a, b, c,
                               d, e, f
X            integral type     unsigned hexadecimal integer
                               with uppercase letters, i.e., A, B,
                               C,D,E,F
f            floating point    signed real number with the form
                               [-]ddd.ddd. The number of digits
                               after the decimal point is deter-
                               mined by the precision field, or is
                               6 if precision is not specified. The
                               "." will not appear if precision is
                               O.
e            floating point    Signed real number with the
                               form [-]d.ddd e+dd. There is al-
                               ways exactly one digit before the
                               decimal point, followed by an "e",
                               followed by an exponent at least
                               two characters long. Precision
                               considerations are the same as "f".




                             printf (C, M) - Standard 1/0
                            Aztec C Library Manual



       E         floating point    Same as "e", but with a capital"E"
                                   for the exponent.
       g          floating point      Signed real number in either
                                      "f" or "e" form. "e"-format is
                                      used if the exponen t is less
                                      than -4 or greater than or
                                      equal to the precision (6 by
                                      default). Otherwise, "f" for-
                                      mat is used.
       G          floating point      Same as "g", but use "E" or "f"
                                      formats.
       c          integral type       The integer argument is con-
                                      verted to an unsigned char,
                                      and the ASCII character cor-
                                      responding to the number is
                                      output.
        s         pointer             The string pointed to is writ-
                                      ten out until either a null is
                                      reached, or the number of
                                      characters written equals the
                                      prevision field.
        p         pointer             The contents of the pointer
                                      (that is, the address of the ob-
                                      ject is printing at) is written to
                                      the output.
        n         pointer              The number of characters
                                       written so far is written to the
                                       argument, which should be a
                                       pointer to an into No output
                                       conversion is done.
        %                              A % is written, and no argu-
                                       ment is converted. The full
                                       syntax of this is "%%".




printf (C, M) - Standard 1/0
                Library Functions



There are two versions of printfO in the libraries: a non-floating
point version in c.lib and a floating point version in m.lib. If a
%f or %g conversion prints out as "f" or "g", then you are either
not linking in a math library or are linking libraries in the
wrong order. To fix this problem, you should link in the math
library before the c library on your link line, as shown:
  In .. , -In -lc




                           printf (C, M) - Standard I/O
                                     Aztec C           Manual



TYPE            putc (0 - Standard I/O                                ANSI


NAME            putc - write a character to an I/O stream


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int putc (int c, FILE *stream);

DESCRIPTION putcO takes the character c and writes it to the specified I/O
            stream. Unless an I/O error occurs, putcO returns c. If an error
                does occur, putcO returns EOP. This function is identical to
                £putcO.


SEE ALSO        putcharO, £putcO


DIAGNOSTICS putcO returns EOF if an error occurs. The actual error code is
                placed in ermo.




       pute (C) - Standard 1/0
                               Library Functions



TYPE           putchar (C) - Standard I/O                         ANSI


NAME           putchar - write a character to the stdout stream


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                 int putchar (int d;

DESCRIPTION putcharO is identical to the function putcO, except that it
               always writes to stdout, i.e., it is the same as
                 putc (stdout)

DIAGNOSTICS putcharO returns EOFif an I/O occurred during the write. The
               error code is set in the global integer ermo.


SEE ALSO       putcO, fputcO




                                           putchar (C) - Standard I/O
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           puts (0 - Standard I/O                                     ANSI


NAME            puts - write a string to stdout


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int puts (const char *str)i

DESCRIPTION puts writes the null-terminated character string pointed to by
                str to the stdout stream, followed by a "\n". The null at the end
                of the string is not written to stdout. If puts is successful, it
                returns a positive value. If an error occurs, EOF is returned.


DIAGNOSTICS EOF is returned by putsO if an error occurs, with the error
                number contained in errno.




       puts (C) - Standard 1/0
                                 Library Functions



TYPE             qsort (C) - Miscellaneous                                   Aztec


NAME             qsort - sort an array of records in memory


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdlib.h>
                   void qsort (void *array, size_t num,
                   size_t width, int (*fund (»;

DESCRIPTION qsortO sorts an array of elements using Hoare's Quicksort
            algorithm. array is a pointer to the array to be sorted; num is the
            number of records to be sorted; width is the size in bytes of each
                 array element; tunc is a pointer to a function that is called for a
                 comparison of two array elements. This function must be
                 written by you.
                tunc is passed pointers to the two elements being compared. It
                must return an integer less than, equal to, or greater than zero,
                depending on whether the first argument is to be considered
                less than, equal to, or greater than the second.


EXAMPLE          The Aztec linker, In, can generate a file of text containing a
                 symbol table for a program. Each line of the file contains an
                 address at which a symbol is located, followed by a space,
                 followed by the symbol name. The following program reads
                 such a symbol table from the standard input, sorts it by ad-
                 dress, and writes it to standard output.




                                              qsort (C) • Miscellaneous
                          Aztec C Library Manual



         #include <stdio.>
         define MAXLlNES 2000
         define LlNESIZE 16
         char *lines[MAXLlNES];
         main()
         {
             int i, numlines, cmp();
             char buf[LlNESIZE],
             * malloc(), *gets();
             for (numlines    =
                             0; numlines < MAXLlNES;
               ++numlines)

               if (gets (buf)     ==
                                (char *)NULL)
               break;
               lines[numlines] = malloc(LlNESIZE);
               strcpy(lines[numlines], buf);

             qsort (lines, numlines,
             sizeof(char *), cmp);
             for (i = 0; i < numlines; ++i)
             printf ("%s \n", lines[i]);

         cmp (a, b)
         char **a, **b;

             return strcmp(*a, *b);




qsort (C) - Miscellaneous
                             Library Functions



TYPE          ran (M) - Float Math                                 Aztec


NAME          ran - generate floating point random numbers


SYNOPSIS        #include <math.h>
                double ran (void);

DESCRIPTION ranO returns as its value a random floating point number
              between 0.0 and 1.0. The seed value for ranO can be set with
              the function sranO.
              ran is not defined by ANSI.


SEE ALSO      sranO, randO, srandO




                                                 ran (M) - Float Math
                                     Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE          rand (0 - Integer Math                          ANSI


NAME          rand - return a pseudo-random integer


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdlib.h>
                 int rand (void);

DESCRIPTION randO returns a pseudo-random integer in the range 0 to
              RAND_MAX. The seed value used by randO may be set with
              the srandO function.


SEE ALSO       srandO, ranO, sranO




       rand (e) - Integer Math
                                Library Functions



TYPE            read (0 - UNIX 110                                 Aztec/UNIX


NAME            read - read from a device or file using unbuffered I/O


SYNOPSIS          #include <fcntl.h>
                  int read
                  (int fd, void *buf, size_t bufsize)i

DESCRIPTION readO reads characters from a device or disk file which has
                been previously opened by a call to openO or creatO. In most
                cases, the information is read directly into the caller's buffer.
                fd is the file descriptor which was returned to the caller when
                the device or file was opened.
                buf is a pointer to the buffer into which the information is to be
                placed.
                bufsize is the number of characters to be transferred.
                If rea dO is successful, it returns as its value the number of
                characters transferred.
                If the returned value is zero, then end-of-file has been reached,
                immediately, with no bytes read.


SEE ALSO        openO, closeO


DIAGNOSTICS If the operation is not successful, readO returns -1 and places
                a code in the global integer ermo.




                                                      read (C) - UNIX I/O
                                       Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            realloc (0 - Memory Allocation                              ANSI


NAME            realloc - re-alloca te an existing memory block to a different size


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  void *realloc (void *ptr, size_t size);


DESCRIPTION reallocO changes the size of a memory block, ptr, that was
                originally allocated with the callocO, reallocO, or mallocO
                functions. The data contained in the original block is guaran-
                teed to be preserved by reallocO, even if the block has to be
                moved to accommodate a larger size.
                If size is larger than the original block size, the area beyond the
                original block size should not be assumed to contain any initial
                value. If the new size is smaller, the data will be truncated at
                the appropriate point. If size is 0, reallocO deallocates the block
                in a manner similar to the freeO function. If ptr is 0, reallocO
                behaves like the mallocO function and allocates a new block of
                length size.
                If ptr does not pOint to a block previously allocated by mallocO,
                callocO, or reallocO, or if ptr was deallocated by the freeO
                function, the behavior of reallocO is unpredictable.


SEE ALSO        mallocO, callocO, freeO, lmallocO


DIAGNOSTICS If reallocO cannot find a block at least size bytes in length
            available, it returns a null pointer. Otherwise, a pointer to the
                requested block is returned.




       realloc (C) - Memory Allocation
                                         Functions



TYPE            remove (C) - Standard 110                              ANSI


NAME            remove - delete a file


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdio.h>
                   int remove (const char *filename>;

DESCRIPTION removeO deletes the disk file named filename from the disk.
            removeO returns 0 if it is successful, and non-zero if it is not.


SEE ALSO        unlink 0


DIAGNOSTICS If an error occurs, removeO sets ermo with the error code and
                returns a non-zero value.




                                            remove (C) - Standard I/O
                                     Aztec C           Manual



TYPE          rename (C) - Standard 110                                  ANSI


NAME          rename - rename a disk file


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                 int rename (const char *old,       const
                   char *new);

DESCRIPTION renameO changes the name of a file. old is a pointer to a
              null-terminated string containing the old file name, and new is
              a pointer to a null-terminated string containing the new name
              of the file.
              If successful, renameO returns 0 as its value; if unsuccessful, it
              returns EOF.
               If a file with the new name already exists, renameO sets
               E_EXIST in the global integer ermo and returns EOF as its
               value without renaming the file.




       rename (C) - Standard 1/0
                                Library Functions



TYPE            rewind (C) - Standard I/O                                 ANSI


NAME            rewind - reposition a stream's position indicator to the begin-
                ning of the file


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  void rewind (FILE "stream);

DESCRIPTION rewindO sets the indicated stream's file position indicator to
                the beginning of the file. rewindO is equivalent to the call:
                   (void) fseek (stream, OL, SEEK_SET);
                with the exception that rewindO also clears the error indicator
                for the stream.


SEE ALSO        fseekO




                                             rewind (C) - Standard 1/0
                                       Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE             rindex (C) - String Handling                               Aztec


NAME             rindex - find the last occurrence of a character in a string


SYNOPSIS           #include <string.h>
                   char "rindex (char "str, char C)i


DESCRIPTION rindexO returns a pointer to the last occurrence of c within the
            string pointed to by str. If the character is not found in str, then
                 NULL is returned.
                 rindexO is not supported by ANSI and generally is not a
                 portable function. For this reason, the equivalent ANSI func-
                 tion strrchrO should be used whenever possible.


SEE ALSO         strchrO, strrchrO, indexO




       rindex (C) - String Handling
                              Library Functions



TYPE           sbrk (C) - Memory Allocation                             Aztec


NAME           sbrk - memory allocation function


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdlib.h>
                 void "sbrk (size_t size);

DESCRIPTION sbrkO, which is contained along with alternate versions of
               other memory-allocation functions in the file heapmem.o,
               provides an elementary means of allocating and deallocating
               space from a contiguous block of memory. When first called,
               sbrkO gets a block of memory by calling the Amiga function
               AllocMem. The default size of this block is 40K bytes. A
               program can specify a different size by setting the desired size
               in the global long _Heapsize before issuing its first call to a
               memory-allocation function or to a standard I/O function.
               sbrkO maintains a pointer to the top of allocated space within
               the block. When called, sbrkO increments this pointer by size
               bytes and returns the value that the pointer had on entry.
               When a program terminates, the block of memory that was
               allocated by sbrkO, if any, is automatically released.


ERRORS         If an sbrkO request would make the sbrkO pointer go past the
               end of sbrkO's block of memory, sbrkO will return -1 as its
               value, without modifying its pointer.




                                      sbrk (C) - Memory Allocation
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           scanf (C,M) - Standard liD                                 ANSI


NAME            scanf - perform formatted input conversion on the stdin
                stream


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int scanf (const char      *fmt, ...);
DESCRIPTION scanfO converts a stream of text characters from the stream as
                directed by the control string pointed to by the fmt parameter
                and places the results in the additional pointer parameters.
                There must be the same number of format specifiers in the fmt
                string as painter arguments.

                THE FORMAT STRING
                The fmt string controls exactly how scanfO will scan, convert,
                and store each of the input fields. The conversion string is
                made up of the following items:

                 • conversion specifiers
                 • white space (spaces, tabs, newlines)
                 • ordinary characters

                The scanfO function works through the fmt string, attempting
                to match each control item with a portion of the input stream.
                During the matching process, scanfO fetches characters one at
                a time from the input.
                When a character is fetched which is not appropriate for the
                item being matched, scanfO pushes the character back into the
                stream using ungetcO.
                scanfO terminates when it first fails to match an item in the fmt
                string or when the end of the input stream is reached. It returns
                the number of matched conversion specifiers or EOF if the end
                of the input stream was reached.



       scanf (e,M) - Standard 1/0
                         Functions



Matching White Space Characters
When a white space character is encountered in the control
string, the scanfO function fetches input characters until the
first non-white-space character is read. The non-white-space
character is pushed back into the input and the scanfO function
proceeds to the next item in the control string.

Matching Ordinary Characters
If an ordinary character is encountered in the control string, the
scanfO function fetches the next input character. If it matches
the ordinary character, the scanfO function simply proceeds to
the next control string item. If it does not match, the scanfO
function terminates.

Matching Conversion Specifications
When a conversion specification is encountered in the control
string, the scanfO function first skips leading white space on
the input stream or buffer. It then fetches characters from the
stream or buffer until encountering one that is inappropriate
for the conversion specification. This character is pushed back
into the input.
If the conversion specification did not request assignment
suppression (discussed below), the character string which was
read is converted to the format specified by the conversion
specification, the result is placed in the location pointed at by
the current pointer argument, and the next pointer argument
becomes current. The scanfO function then proceeds to the
next control string item.
If assignment suppression was requested by the conversion
specification, the scanfO function simply ignores the fetched
input characters and proceeds to the next control item.

Details of Input Conversion
A conversion specification consists of:




                            scanf (e,M) - Standard 1/0
                             Aztec C Library Manual



        • The character %, which tells the scanfO function that it has
          encountered a conversion specification
        • Optionally, the assignment suppression character >l-
        • Optionally a field width, that is, a number specifying the
          maximum number of characters to be fetched for the con-
          version
        • A conversion character, specifying the type of conversion to
          be performed.
       If the assignment suppression character is present in a conver-
       sion specification, the scanfO function will fetch characters as
       if it were going to perform the conversion, ignore them, and
       proceed to the next control string item.
       The following conversion characters are supported:
       %     A single % is expected in the input. No assignment is
             done.
       d     A decimal integer is expected, the input digit string is
             converted to binary and the result placed in the int field
             pointed at by the current pointer argument. The cor-
             responding argument is pointer to int.
       o     An octal integer is expected; the corresponding pointer
             should point to an int field in which the converted result
             will be placed. The corresponding argument is pointer to
             unsigned int.
       x     A hexadecimal integer is expected; the converted value
             will be placed in the int field pointed at by the current
             pointer argument. The corresponding argument is
             pointer to unsigned int
       s     A sequence of characters delimited by white space char-
             acters is expected; they, plus a terminating null character,
             are placed in the character array pointed to by the current
             pointer argument.
       c     A character is expected. It is placed in the char field
             pointed at by the current pointer to character array. The


scant (e,M) - Standard I/O
               Library Functions



    normal skip over leading white space is not done; to read
    a single char after skipping leading white space, use %Is.
    The field width parameter is ignored, so this conversion
    can be used only to read a single character. It matches a
    sequence of characters of the number specified by field
    width.
    A sequence of characters, optionally preceded by white
    space but not terminated by white space, is expected. The
    input characters, plus a terminating null character, are
    placed in the character array pointed at by the current
    pointer argument. The left bracket is followed by:

       Optionally, a A or - character;
       A set of characters;
       A right bracket, ].

    If the first character in the set is not A or -, the set specifies
    characters which are allowed; characters are fetched
    from the input until one is read which is not in the set.
    If the first character in the set is A or -, the set specifies
    characters which are not allowed; characters are fetched
    from the input until one is read which is in the set.
i   a signed integer, value of 0 for base argument. Cor-
    responding argument should be pointer to into
u   unassigned decimal integer. The argument correspond-
    ing to this item should be pointer to unsigned into
p   reads in a hexadecimal long value which represents a
    pointer. The corresponding argument should be a void
    pointer.
n   Argument should be a pointer to an into The number of
    characters read in so far from stdin is written to this
    pointer. Execution of %n does not increment the assign-
    ment count returned at completion of execution of the
    fscanfO/scanfO function.




                           scanf (e,M) - Standard 1/0
                                  Aztec C Lib       Manual



            e,f,g A floating point number is expected. The input string is
                  converted to floating point format and stored in the float
                  field pointed at by the current pointer argument. The
                  input format for floating point numbers consists of an
                  optionally signed string of digits, possibly containing a
                  decimal point, optionally followed by an exponent field
                  consisting of an E or e followed by an optionally signed
                  digit.
            The conversion characters d, 0, and x can be capitalized or
            preceded by I to indicate that the corresponding pointer is to a
            long rather than an int. Similarly, the conversion characters e
            and f can be capitalized or preceded by I to indicate that the
            corresponding pointer is to a double rather than a float.
            The conversion characters 0, x, and d can be optionally
            preceded by h to indicate that the corresponding pointer is to
            a short rather than an int.


SEE ALSO    fscanfO, sscanfO




    scanf (C, M) - Standard 1/0
                              Library Functions



TYPE          scdir (0 - Amiga                                        Amiga


NAME          scdir - return the name of the next file matching pattern


SYNOPSIS         #include <fcntl.h>
                 char * scdir (char *pat);

DESCRIPTION scdirO is a function that permits you to perform wildcard
               expansion on filename patterns using native Amiga facilities.
              When scdirO is called with a pattern, it returns a pointer to a
              static area containing the null terminated name of the next file
              that matches the pattern, or zero if no more files match the
              pattern. Since the area containing the name is statically allo-
              cated, the name will be overwritten by subsequent calls to
              scdirO.
              Patterns have two wildcard characters. The asterisk (*) matches
              any number of characters. The question mark (?) matches a
              single character. Note that scdirO uses UNIX wild-card con-
              ventions, not AmigaDos conventions.


EXAMPLE          main ()
                 {
                     char *sav[lOO];
                     register char *pat;
                     register int i;
                     /* get all .c files on current dir */

                     pat = "*.c";
                     i = 0;


                   while «ptr = scdir(pat»    && i < 100)
                      sav[i]     =
                               malloc (strlen(ptr)+l);
                      strcpy(sav[i++], ptr);
                 /* rest of program */


                                                     scdir (C) • Amiga
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE          screen (5) - Amiga                                     Amiga


NAME          scr_beep, scr_bs, scr_tab, scr_If,
              scr_cursup, scr_cursrt, scr_cr,
              scr_clear, scr_home, scr_curs, scr_eol,
              scr_linsert, scr_ldelete,
              scr_cinsert, scr3delete - screen manipulation functions


SYNOPSIS        void    scr_beep (void)
                void    scr_bs (void)
                void     scr_tab (void)
                void    scr_If (void)
                void    scr_cursup (void)
                void    scr3ursrt (void)
                void    scr3r (void)
                void    scr_clear (void)
                void    scr_home (void)
                void    scr_eol (void)
                void    scr_linsert (void)
                void    scr_Idelete (void)
                void    scr3insert (void)
                void    scr_cdelete (void)
                void    scr_curs (lin, col)
                void    int lin, COli

DESCRIPTION These functions can be called by command programs to
              manipulate screens of text. For example, there are functions to
              clear the screen, position the cursor, and insert and delete
              characters and lines.
              These functions can be used in conjunction with the normal
              standard 1/ 0 and unbuffered 1/ 0 functions to display charac-
              ters on the console.


       screen (5) - Amiga
                         Functions



scr_beepO rings the keyboard bell.
scr_bsO moves the cursor back one character space without
modifying the character that was backspaced over.
scr_tabO moves the cursor right one tab stop.
scr_lfO moves the cursor down one line, scrolling if at the
bottom of the screen.
scr_cursupO moves the cursor up without changing its column
location.
scr_cursrtO moves the cursor right one character space,
without modifying the character that was spaced over.
scr_crO causes a carriage return.
sccclearO clears the screen and homes the cursor.
scr_homeO homes the cursor to the upper left hand comer of
the screen.
scr_cursO moves the cursor to the line and column specified
by the lin and col parameters, respectively.
scr3010 erases the line at which the cursor is located, from the
current cursor position to the end of the line.
scclinsertO inserts a blank line at the cursor location, moving
the lines below the cursor down one line.
scr_ldeleteO deletes the line at the cursor location, moving the
lines below the cursor up one line and placing a blank line at
the bottom of the screen.
scr3insertO inserts a space at the cursor location, shifting right
one character the characters in the line which are on the right
of the cursor.
scr_cdeleteO deletes the character at the cursor location, shift-
ing left one character the characters in the line which are on the
right of the cursor.




                                     screen (5) - Amiga
                                     Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           segload (0 - Amiga                                      Amiga


NAME           segload -load a program segment


SYNOPSIS         void segload (int (*func)(»;

DESCRIPTION segloadO is used with segmented (overlay) programs to force
               an overlay segment into memory without actually calling any
               of the functions within it. Normally, when a function is called
               that is not in memory, its segment is automatically loaded and
               the function is then jumped to.
               The argument junc should be the name of a function within the
               segment you want to load. The segloadO function is often used
               by a program when it detects a sufficient amount of free
               memory is available to hold the entire program. segloadO is
               called to load all of the program's segments at the start of the
               program, which puts all of the load delay just at the beginning.


SEE ALSO       freesegO




       segload (e) - Amiga
                                                                   ······:::::::::·····,·······················0

                              Library Functions                        g@:!14S·.•.•.•:..•·.•.
                                                                   :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::




TYPE          setbuf (0 - Standard liD                                                       ANSI


NAME          setbuf - associate an I/O stream with a specific buffer


SYNOPSIS        #include <stdio.h>
                void setbuf (FILE *stream, char *bufti

DESCRIPTION    setbufO is equivalent to setvbufO function called in the
              following manner:
               • If but is not null, then setbufO is the same as setvbufO called
                 with _IOFBF (fully buffered) for mode and BUFSIZE
                 (defined in stdio.h) for size. Note that this means that your
                 buffer must be at least BUFSIZE in length.
               • If but is null, then setbufO is the same as setvbufO called
                with _IONBF (no buffering) for mode.


SEE ALSO      setvbufO




                                           setbuf (C) - Standard I/O
                                      Aztec C            Manual



TYPE           setenv {O - Miscellaneous                                  Amiga


NAME           setenv - set environment variables


SYNOPSIS          void setenv {char ""name, char ""but>;

DESCRIPTION This function adds or deletes environment variables to or from
            the pseudo-library used to implement the environment. name
                is a pointer to the environment variable to be changed and buf
                is a pointer to the new value. If buf points to a null string, the
                variable name will be removed from the environment.
                If the environment does not already exist, it will be created.




       setenv (C) - Miscellaneous
                               Library Functions



TYPE           setjmp - Miscellaneous                                    ANSI


NAME           setjmp(C) - set up for a non-local goto


SYNOPSIS         #include <setjmp.h>
                 int setjmp (jmp_buf env);

DESCRIPTION setjmpO is used in conjunction with longjmpO to allow gotos
               between functions. This is useful for error recovery from low-
               level routines as well as quick returns from deeply-nested
               functions.
               The argument env should be declared as an instance of the type
               jmp_buf. setjmpO saves the current stack and register vari-
               able information in env so that this information may be restored
               upon invocation of a longjmpO, and returns a O.


SEE ALSO       longjmpO




                                             setjmp - Miscellaneous
                                     Aztec C L          Manual



TYPE           setvbuf (C) - Standard I/O                                  ANSI


NAME           setvbuf - associate an I/O stream with a specific buffer


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int setvbuf (FILE *stream, char *buf,
                     int mode, size_t size);

DESCRIPTION setvbufO is used when you want to explicitly assign a buffer
               to an I/O stream, rather than let the standard I/O system do it
               automatically. setvbufO should be called after the stream has
               been opened, but before any I/O functions (Le., reading and
               writing) have been performed on the stream.
               The type of buffering to be performed on the stream is deter-
               mined by the mode argument:
                               The stream is fully buffered. On reads from the
                               stream, the I/O system will attempt to fill the
                               entire buffer if the buffer is empty before
                               returning the requested byte(s). On writes, the
                               buffer is written to the file only if the buffer is
                               full.
                                The stream is line buffered. As with _IOFBF,
                                reads from the stream will fill the entire buffer.
                                Writes, however, will flush the buffer if a
                                newline is encountered as well as if the buffer
                                is full.
                                The stream is unbuffered, and the but and size
                                arguments are ignored. This means that each
                                read operation will read directly from the file,
                                and each written operation will write directly
                                to the file, with no intermediate buffering
                                done.
                You must insure that but stays in existence throughout the time
                the stream is open. This means that if but is a local array, the
                stream must be closed before the function returns. Also, you


       setvbuf (C) - Standard 1/0
                           Library Functions



           are responsible for deallocating buf if it was dynamically allo-
           cated; it is not done automatically by £c1oseO. If you do deal-
           locate buf, it must be deallocated after £c1oseO.


SEE ALSO   setbu£O




                                      setvbuf (C) - Standard I/O
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           signal (C) - Signal                                        ANSI


NAME           signal - define how to handle a signal


SYNOPSIS          #include <signal.h>
                  void (*signal (int sig, void
                     (*func> (int») (int);

DESCRIPTION signalO specifies that the signal whose number is sig is to be
            handled as defined by function. A SIGNAL is a special
            asynchronous event such as an operator-initiated interrupt or
            an arithmetic fault.

                Signals and the sig Parameter
                The following list defines the symbolic values that sig can have
                and the signal associated with each value. These values are
                defined in signal.h. The signals that are currently supported
                are:
                  SIGFPE        traps divide by 0 and overflow
                  SIGILL        traps on illegal instruction
                  SIGSEGV       traps illegal address or bus error

                Signal Processing and the tunc Parameter
                func defines the action to be performed on receipt of the
                specified signal. It can be one of three values: SIGN_DFL,
                SIG_IGN, or a function address.
                If the func for a signal is SIG_DFL, the program will be ter-
                minated by the operating system, without execution of the
                normal Aztec C exit code. This could result in a loss of infor-
                mation in files opened for standard output.
                If the func for a signal is SIG_IGN, the signal will be ignored.
                Any other value for func is assumed to be the address of a
                function. In this case, when the specified signal occurs, the


       signal (C) - Signal
                           Library Functions



           function will be called, passing the signal's number as the
           function's only argument. Before the function is called, the
           value of june for the received signal will be set to SIC_DFL.
           The function associated with a signal can terminate its pro-
           gram, if desired, by calling exitO or longjmpO. It can also
           return to the program at the point of interruption by issuing a
           return statement.
           When a program activates another program, by calling one of
           the exec or system functions, the june for the signals of the
           called program are initially set to SIC_DFL regardless of their
           setting in the calling program. If the called program returns to
           the calling program, the june for the signals in the calling
           program resume the value that they had just prior to the
           activation of the called program.

           Return Values from Signal
           If a requested change is accepted, signal returns the value that
           the specified signal's june had on entry to signal. If the change
           is rejected, signal returns the value SIC_ERR and the global
           integer errno is set to indicate the error. Currently, the only
           cause for rejection is an invalid signal number, causing ermo
           to be set to EINVAL.
           If the request cannot be honored, a value of SIC_ERR is
           returned and a positive value is stored in ermo.


EXAMPLES   The following program calls signalO, so that upon receipt of a
           bus error the program can shut itself down in an orderly
           fashion, closing opened files, deleting temporary files, and so
           on.




                                                 signal (C) - Signal
                            Aztec C Library Manual



         #include <signal.h>
         main ()
          {
              signal (SIGSEGV, shutdown)
              ... /* normal program execution */

          shutdown (sign)
          int sig;

          print ("received signal %d\n", sig);
             ... /* termination */
            exit(l);




signal (C) - Signal
                                    Library Functions



TYPE            sin(~)-Float~ath                                          ANSI


NAME            sin - return the sine of a double value


SYNOPSIS           #include <math.h>
                   double sin (double x);

DESCRIPTION sinO returns the sine of x. x should be specified in radians.
                Error codes:
                condition                 return value          errno
                 I x I > 6.7465e9         0.0                   ERANGE




                                                         sin (M) - Float Math
                                    Aztec C           Manual



TYPE           sinh (M) - Float Math                                        ANSI


NAME           sinh - return the hyperbolic sine of a double value


SYNOPSIS         #include <math.h>
                 double sinh (double x)j

DESCRIPTION sinhO returns the hyperbolic sine of x. sinhO will return
            HUGE_VAL and set errno equal to ERANGE if x is greater than
            348.6.
               Error codes:
               condition                       return value          ermo
               Ix I > LOGHUGE+ -0.6932                                ERANGE




       sinh (M) - Float Math
                                Library Functions



TYPE            sprintf (C, M) - Conversion                                 ANSI


NAME            sprintf - write formatted data to a buffer


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int sprintf {char *buf, const char *fmt,
                   ••• )i

DESCRIPTION sprintfO is used to write formatted ASCII data to the specified
                buffer buf. The fmt string specifies the exact contents of but and
                also determines the number of additional required arguments.
                See the printfO function for complete details on the fmt string.


SEE ALSO        printfO, fprintfO, formatO




                                           sprintf (C, M) - Conversion
                                       Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           sqrt (M) - Float Math                                    ANSI


NAME           sqrt - compute the non-negative square root of a value


SYNOPSIS          #include <math.h>
                  double sqrt (double x);


DESCRIPTION sqrtO returns the nonnegative square root of the input
               parameter x.


SEE ALSO        expO, logO, loglOO, powO


DIAGNOSTICS If x is negative, ermo is set to EDOM and sqrtO returns 0.0 as
                its value.




       sqrt (M) - Float Math
                               Library Functions



TYPE            sran (M) - Float Math                               Aztec


NAME            sran - set the random number seed for ran


SYNOPSIS          #include <math.h>
                  void sran (double seed);

DESCRIPTION sranO is used to set the seed-value for the function ranO.
                sranO is not defined by ANSI.


SEE ALSO        ranO, randO, srandO




                                                sran (M) - Float Math
                                 Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           srand (C) - Integer Math                               ANSI


NAME           srand - initialize the seed value used by rand


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdlib.h>
                 void srand (unsigned int seed);

DESCRIPTION The value seed passed to srandO is used to determine the
            pseudo-random sequence returned by future calls to randO. If
               srandO is called more than once with the same value for seed,
               then the same sequence will be repeated. If randO is called
               before srandO, then randO will behave as if srandO had been
               called with a seed of 1.


SEE ALSO       randO, ranO, sranO




       srand (C) - Integer Math
                                        Functions



TYPE            sscanf (C,M) - Conversion                                ANSI


NAME            sscanf - perform formatted input conversion on a buffer


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdio.h>
                  int sscanf (const char *str, const char
                   *fmt, ...)j

DESCRIPTION sscanfO is identical to the scanfO function, except that sscanfO
                reads from the buffer pointed to by str rather than from stdin.


SEE ALSO        scanfO, fscanfO




                                          sscanf (e,M) - Conversion
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            stat (0 - UNIX liD                                      Amiga


NAME            stat - return file information


SYNOPSIS          #include <stat.h>
                  #include <time.h>
                  struct stat *stat (char *name, struct stat
                  *buf)i

DESCRIPTION statO returns the attribute byte, date and time, and size of the
                filename. This information is returned inbuJ, which has the
                following format:
                  struct stat {
                     char st_attr;
                     long st_mtime;
                     long st_size;
                     long st_rsize;
                   };
                This structure, and the meaning of the bits in the attribute and
                time fields, are defined in the header files stat.h and time.h.
                name can optionally specify the full pathname where the file is
                located.


ERRORS          statO returns -1 if it fails, after setting a code in the global
                integer errno.




       stat (C) - UNIX 1/0
                               Library Functions



TYPE           _stkchk (C) - Miscellaneous                               Amiga


NAME           _stkchk - check for stack overflow


SYNOPSIS          void _stkchk (void);

DESCRIPTION _stkchkO is an assembly language routine that is called at the
               beginning of every function that has been compiled with the
               stack checking option -bd. It attempts to determine if the
               current stack is below the base that is initialized by the startup
               code. It also checks to see if a code word placed at the bottom
               of the stack has been corrupted. If either event has not oc-
               curred, control is returned to the function; otherwise, the
               _stkoverO function is called.




                                        _stkchk (C) - Miscellaneous
                                 Aztec C           Manual



TYPE          _stkover (C) - Miscellaneous                            Amiga


NAME          _stkover - report stack overflow


SYNOPSIS         void _stkover (void);

DESCRIPTION _stkoverO is called by _stkchkO when a stack overflow has
              occurred. The routine supplied in the library resets the stack
              pointer to the top of the stack area and displays the following
              message on standard output:
                 Stack overflow!
               It then calls the _exitO routine.




       _stkover (e) - Miscellaneous
                                         Functions



TYPE             strcat (C) - String Handling                              ANSI


NAME             strcat - concatenate two strings together


SYNOPSIS           #include <string.h>
                   char *strcat(char *dest, const char *srdi

DESCRIPTION strcat() appends a copy of the string pointed to by src to the
            string pointed. to by dest, so that the resulting length of dest is
            strlen (dest) + strlen (src). The first character in src will over-
            write the ending null in dest. strcatO will then return a pointer
            to dest.
                 It is important to note that the area pointed to by dest must be
                 large enough to hold both the strings in dest and src (strlen
                 (dest) + strlen (src) +1) and it is your responsibility to ensure
                 this.


SEE ALSO         strncatO, strcpyO, strncpyO




                                           strcat (C) - String Handling
                                    Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE             strchr (C) - String Handling                                ANSI


NAME             strchr - search for the first occurrence of a character in a string


SYNOPSIS            #include <string.h>
                    char "strchr (const char "str, int C)i

DESCRIPTION strchrO returns a pointer to the first occurrence of the character
            c in string str. If c is not contained in str, then strchrO returns a
                 null str.
                 The strchrO function is equivalent to the Aztec function
                 indexO, with the exception that strchrO can match a null
                 character, whereas indexO cannot.


SEE ALSO         strrchrO, indexO, and rindexO




       strchr (C) - String Handling
                                Library Functions



TYPE           strcmp (C) - String Handling                                ANSI


NAME           strcmp - compare two strings


SYNOPSIS          #include <string.h>
                  int strcmp (const char ·strl,
                     const char ·str2)i

DESCRIPTION strcmpO compares the strings pointed to by strl and str2, and
               determines whether strl is greater than, less than, or equal to
               str2. Equality is determined in the following manner:
                • strcmpO will perform an unsigned comparison on each
                  character in strl and str2, starting with the first character in
                  each and advancing by one character at a time. strcmpO will
                  stop when it finds two differing characters or it reaches the
                  end of one of the strings.
                • If the end of strl is reached but not the end of str2, then strl
                  is less than str2.
                ·If the end of str2 is reached before strl, then strl is greater
                 than str2.
                • If the end of both strings is reached simultaneously with no
                  differing characters, then the two strings are equal.
                • If the two characters differ, then strl is greater than str2 if
                  strl's character is greater than str2. Otherwise, strl is less
                  than str2.
               It should be remembered that strcmpO does numerical com-
               parisons, not character comparisons, so that the character "a"
               (ASCII 97) is considered greater than the character "Z" (ASCII
               90).

               The value returned by strcmpO is:




                                       strcmp (C) - String Handling
                                Aztec C               Manual



             -less than 0 (negative) if strl is less than str2.
             - equal to 0 if strl is equal to str2.
             - greater than 0 (positive) if strl is greater than str2.


SEE ALSO    shncmpO




     strcmp (C) - String Handling
                               Library Functions



TYPE           strcoll (C) - String Handling                              ANSI


NAME           strcoll- compare two strings using the current locale


SYNOPSIS         #include <string.h>
                 int strcoll (const char *strl,
                    const char *str2

DESCRIPTION The strcollO function is equivalent to the strcmpO function,
               with the exception that strcollO will use the current locale for
               character translation. (strcoll() is truly equivalent to strcmpO,
               as Aztec C currently supports only the C locale.)


SEE ALSO       strcmpO




                                        strcoll (C) - String Handling
                                  Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            strcpy (C) - String Handling                              ANSI


NAME            strcpy - copy one string to another


SYNOPSIS          #include <string.h>
                  char *strcpy (char *dest,
                      const char *dest)i

DESCRIPTION strcpyO copies the characters in the string pointed to by src to
                the area pointed to by dest, including the tenninating null
                character. The area pointed to by dest must be at least (strlenO
                (src) + 1) characters long. strcpyO always returns dest.


SEE ALSO        strncpyO, memcpyO, memmoveO, strlenO




       strcpy (C) - String Handling
                               Library Functions



TYPE           strcspn (C) - String Handling                               ANSI


NAME           strcspn - return the index of the first character in a string strl
               which is contained in a string str2


SYNOPSIS          #include <string.h>
                  size_t strcspn (const char *str1
                     const char *str2);

DESCRIPTION The strcspnO function returns the index of the first character
                in the string pointed to by strl which matches a character in
                the string pointed to by str2. This index is equal to the number
                of initial characters in strl which do not match a character in
                str2.

SEE ALSO        strspnO, strpbrkO, strstrO, strtokO




                                       strcspn (C) - String Handling
                                  Aztec C            Manual



TYPE           strlen (0 - String Handling                                 ANSI


NAME           strlen - return the length of a string


SYNOPSIS          #include <string.h>
                  size_t strlen (const char "str)i

DESCRIPTION strlenO returns the number of characters in the string pointed
                to by str, not including the terminating null character.
                You should be careful in allocating space for strings based on
                strlenO. A common mistake is to code the following:
                  ptr = mal.l.oc (strl.en (" STRING") ;
                  strcpy (ptr, "STRING");
                This will only set aside six characters for "STRING", when
                seven are actually needed (the six characters in the word plus
                the ending null), and the strcpyO that follows the mallocO call
                will write too many characters.
                The correct way to use strlenO is:
                  ptr = mal.l.oc (strl.en ("STRING") +l.);
                  strcpy (ptr, "STRING");

SEE ALSO        strcpyO, strncpyO




       strlen (C) - String Handling
                                        Functions



TYPE           shncat (C) - String Handling                                ANSI


NAME           shncat- concatenate two strings together, up to max characters


SYNOPSIS          #include <string.h>
                  char *shncat (dest, src max);

DESCRIPTION shncatO appends a copy of the string pointed to by src to the
               string pointed to by dest until either max characters have been
               appended or a null is reached in src, whichever comes first. The
               maximum resulting length of the string pointed to by dest will
               be strlen (dest) and max. The first character in src overwrites the
               ending null in dest. shncatO always returns a pointer to dest.
               It is your responsibility to ensure that the area pointed to by
               dest is at least (strlen(dest) + max + 1) characters long.

SEE ALSO       strcatO, strcpyO, ShncpyO




                                        strncat (e) - String Handling
                               Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE          strncmp (C) - String Handling                           ANSI


NAME          strncmp - compare two strings, up to max characters.


SYNOPSIS        #include <string.h>
                int strncmp (const char *strl,
                    const char *str2, size_t max);

DESCRIPTION strncmpO is equivalent to the strcmpO function, with the
              exception that strncmpO will only compare a maximum of max
              characters. strncmpO returns a positive number, negative
              number, or zero, depending on whether strl is greater than,
              less than, or equal to str2. See the strcmpO function for more
              details.


SEE ALSO      strcmpO, memcmpO, strcoll0, strxfrmO




       s'trncmp (C) - String Handling
                                 Library Functions



TYPE             strncpy (C) - String Handling                             ANSI


NAME             strncpy - copy up to max characters from one string to another


SYNOPSIS            #include <string.h>
                    char ""strncpy (char ""dest,
                         const char ""src, size_t max);

DESCRIPTION strncpyO copies a maximum of max characters from the string
            pointed to by src to the area pointed to by dest. If src is less than
                 max characters long, then dest is padded with null characters
                 until max total characters have been written. The area pointed
                 to by dest must be at least max characters in length.


SEE ALSO         strcpyO, memcpyO, memoveO, strlenO




                                        strncpy (C) - String Handling
                                   Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            strpbrk (C) - String Handling                               ANSI


NAME            strpbrk - return the first occurrence in a string strl of a charac-
                ter in a string str2.


SYNOPSIS           #include <string.h>
                   char "'strpbrk (const char "'strl,
                       const char "'str2)j

DESCRIPTION The strpbrkO function returns a pointer to the first character
            in the string pointed to by strl which is contained in the string
            pointed to by str2. Null is returned if no characters within strl
                match those in str2.


SEE ALSO        strspnO, strcspnO, strstrO, strtokO




       strpbrk (C) - String Handling
                                         Functions



TYPE            strrchr (C) - String Handling                               ANSI


NAME            strrchr - search for the last occurrence of a character in a string


SYNOPSIS           #include <string.h>
                   char ·strrchr (const char ·str, int c);

DESCRIPTION strrchrO returns the last occurrence of the character c in string
            str. If c is not contained in str, then strrchrO returns a null.
                The strrchrO function is equivalent to the Aztec function rin-
                dexO, with the exception that strrchrO can match a null char-
                acter, whereas rindexO cannot.


SEE ALSO        strchrO, indexO, and rindexO




                                         strrchr (C) - String Handling
                                   Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            strspn (C) - String Handling                                ANSI


NAME            strspn - return the index of the first character in a string strl
                which is not contained in a string str2


SYNOPSIS          #include <string.h>
                  size strspn (const char *strl,
                     const char *str2)i

DESCRIPTION The strspnO function returns the index of the first character in
                strl which is not contained in the string pointed to by str2. This
                index is equal to the number of initial characters in strl which
                do match characters in str2.


SEE ALSO        strcspnO, strpbrkO, strstrO, strtokO




       strspn (C) - String Handling
                                 Library Functions



TYPE             strstr (C) - String Handling                                ANSI


NAME             strstr - return a pointer of the first occurrence of a string str2
                 within a string strl                         .

SYNOPSIS           #include <string.1t>
                   char *strstr(const char *str1, const char
                      *str2)i

DESCRIPTION strstrO returns the first occurrence of the substring str2 con-
            tained within the string strl. If str2 is not contained within strl,
                 then null is returned.


SEE ALSO         stcspnO, strspn(), strpbrk(), strtokO




                                            strstr (C) - String Handling
                                      Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            strtod (C) - Conversion                                   ANSI


NAME            strtod - convert a string to a double


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdlib.h>
                  double strtod (cont char "nptr, char
                      .... endptr);

DESCRIPTION strtodO converts the initial portion of the string pointed to by
                nptr into a double value, which is returned by strtodO. The
                string must be in the form:

                   [ws] [+1-] ddd [.] [ddd] [exp]
                where
                 • ws is whitespace (newline, space, tab)
                 • +/ - means + or -
                 • ddd are digits 0-9
                 • exp is an optional exponent of the form:
                             [e/E +/- ddd]
                Note: In the above input, the slashes indicate "or".
                strtod stops reading characters when it encounters a character
                in nptr which cannot be interpreted as part of a double value.
                It sets ""endptr equal to a pointer to this character (as long as
                endptr is not null).

DIAGNOSTICS strtod will return HUGE_VAL if the string causes overflow.


SEE ALSO        atofO, stroulO, strtol(), atoIO, atoiO




       strtod (C) - Conversion
                                          Functions



TYPE            strtok (C) - String Handling                                 ANSI


NAME            strtok - tokenize a string


SYNOPSIS           #include <string.h>
                   char "strtok (char "str, const char
                      "deUist)i

DESCRIPTION strtokO is designed to be called multiple times to break str into
                a series of tokens, each of which is delimited by a character
                contained in deUist. The operation of strtokO is detailed below.
                First Invocation:
                On the first invocation of strtokO with str, strtokO will search
                for the first character in str which is not contained in deUist
                (that is, it scans past delimiters.)
                 • If a character is found which is not in deClist, it is considered
                   to be the start of the first token.
                 • If such a character is not found, there are no tokens in str and
                   a null pointer is void.
                strtokO then searches from the token's start for a character that
                is contained in deClist (it scans to the next delimiter.)
                 • If a character is found in str which is contained in deUist,
                   strtokO overwrites it with a null character which tenninates
                   the token. strtokO will then internally save a pointer to the
                   following character, from which the next token search will
                   start. A pointer to the token is then returned by strtokO.
                 • If no characters in strl are found to be in del_tist, then the
                   current token is considered to extend to the end of str.
                   strtokO will return a pointer to the token, and subsequent
                   calls to strtokO will return a null pointer.




                                             strtok (C) - String Handling
                              Aztec C Library Manual



            Subsequent Invocation:
            All calls of strtokO following the initial call should pass a null
            pointer for the first argument. This instructs strtokO to use its
            internal pointer in order to locate the next token. strtokO will
            then behave as described above. Subsequent calls may, if you
            wish, have different delimiters specified by del_list.


SEE ALSO    strchrO, strrchrO, strspnO, strcspnO




    strtok (C) - String Handling
                                       Functions



TYPE           strxfrm (C) - String Handling                              ANSI


NAME           strxfrm - transform a string to match the current locale


SYNOPSIS          #include <string.h>
                  sizej strxfrm (char *dest,
                      const char *src, sizej n);

DESCRIPTION strxfrmO transforms the string pointed at by src to match the
               current locale. The transformed string is then copied to dest,
               and the length of dest is returned.
               Because only the "c" locale is currently supported, strxfrmO
               actually does no transformations, but simply performs a
               strcpyO followed by a strlenO.


SEE ALSO       strcpyO, strcollO, strcmpO, strlenO




                                      strxfrm (C) - String Handling
                                     Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            tan (M) - Float Math                                   ANSI


NAME            tan - return the tangent of a double value


SYNOPSIS          #include <math.h>
                  double tan(double xl;

DESCRIPTION tanO returns the tangent of x. x should be specified in radians.
                Error codes:
                condition               return value          errno
                I x I .. 6.74652e9      0.0                   ERANGE




       tan (M) - Float Math
                              Library Functions



TYPE           tanh (M) - Float Math                                    ANSI


NAME           tanh - return the hyperbolic tangent of a double value


SYNOPSIS         #include <math.h>
                 double tanh (double x);

DESCRIPTION tanhO returns the hyperbolic tangent of x.




                                               tanh (M) - Float Math
                                 Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           time <C) - Time                                           ANSI


NAME           time - return the time of day


SYNOPSIS         #include <time.h>
                 time_t time<time_t *timeptr);

DESCRIPTION The timeO function places the current time of day into the
               location pointed to by timeptr. This value is suitable for use by
               the ctimeO, gmtimeO, and localtimeO functions. The current
               time is also returned by timeO, in the same format as is placed
               in timeptr.


SEE ALSO       ctimeO, gmtimeO, localtimeO




       time (C) - Time
                               Library Functions



TYPE          tmpfile (C) - Standard liD                                   ANSI


NAME          tmpfile - create a temporary file


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                 FILE ""tmpfile(void)i

DESCRIPTION tmpfileO creates a temporary binary file and opens it for
               standard I/O in update (wb+) mode. tmpfileO returns as its
               value the file's FILE pointer.
               When the temporary file is closed, either because the program
               explicitly closes it or because the program terminates, the
               temporary file is automatically deleted.
               If the file cannot be created, the function returns a null pointer.


SEE ALSO       tmpnamO, mktempO




                                           tmpfile (C) - Standard 1/0
                                Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           tmpnam (0 - Standard liD                                 ANSI


NAME           tmpnam - create a name for a temporary file


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                 char *tmpnam (char *s);

DESCRIPTION tmpnamO creates a character string that can be used as the
               name of a temporary file and returns as its value a pointer to
               the string. The generated string is not the name of an existing
               file.
               s optionally points to an area into which the name will be
               generated. This must contain at least L_tmpnam bytes, where
               L_tmpnam is a constant defined in stdio.h.
               s can also be a null pointer. In this case, the name will be
               generated in an internal array. The contents of this array are
               destroyed each time tmpnamO is called with a null argument.
               tmpnamO can be called a maximum of TMP_MAX times.


SEE ALSO       tmpfileO, mktempO




       tmpnam (C) - Standard I/O
                                          Functions



TYPE            tolower (C) - Conversion                               ANSI


NAME            tolower - convert a character to lowercase


SYNOPSIS           #include <ctype.h>
                   int tolower (int c)i

DESCRIPTION tolowerO converts an uppercase character to lowercase. If the
            value of c is an uppercase character, tolowerO returns its lower-
            case equivalent, otherwise c is returned unchanged.


SEE ALSO        toupperO




                                            tolower (C) - Conversion
                                Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE           toupper (C) - Conversion                               ANSI


NAME           toupper - convert a character to uppercase


SYNOPSIS         #include <ctype.h>
                 int toupper(int d;

DESCRIPTION toupperO converts a lowercase character to uppercase. If the
               value of the argument c is a lowercase character, toupper()
               returns its uppercase equivalent as its value, otherwise c is
               returned unchanged.


SEE ALSO       tolowerO




       toupper (e) - Conversion
                                       Functions



TYPE           ungetc (C) - Standard 110                                ANSI


NAME           ungetc - push a character back into input stream


SYNOPSIS         #include <stdio.h>
                 int ungetc(int c, FILE "stream);

DESCRIPTION ungetcO pushes the character value of the argument c back
               onto an input stream. That character will be returned by the
               next getcO call on that stream. ungetcO returns c as its value.
               Only one character of pushback is guaranteed. EOF cannot be
               pushed back.


DIAGNOSTICS ungetcO returns EOF (-1) if the character cannot be pushed
               back.




                                           ungetc (e) - Standard 1/0
                                   Aztec C           Manual



TYPE            unlink (C) - UNIX liD                                Aztec/UNIX


NAME            unlink - erase file


SYNOPSIS           int unlink (name);
                   char *name;

DESCRIPTION unlinkO erases a file, where name is a pointer to a character
                array containing the name of the file to be erased.
                 unlinkO returns a 0 value if successful.
                 Since unlinkO is not defined by ANSI, it is strongly recom-
                 mended that the equivalent ANSI function removeO be used
                 in its place.


DIAGNOSTICS unlinkO returns -1 if it could not erase the file and places a code
                 in the global integer errno describing the error.




       unlink (C) - UNIX 1/0
                              Library Functions



TYPE          va_arg, va_end, va_start (C) - Variable Arguments           ANSI


NAME          va_arg, va_end, va_start - variable argument access


SYNOPSIS        #include <stdarg.h>
                type va_arg (va_list argptr, type);
                void va_end (va_list argptr);
                void va_start (va_list argptr, parm N);

DESCRIPTION These three macros are used as a mechanism to access in-
              dividual arguments from within a function that accepts a
              variable number of arguments.
              A function which receives a variable argument count should
              declare a variable, argptr, of type va_list. This variable will be
              used as a pointer to the current argument being processed.
              The va_start() macro should be called first to initialize argptr to
              point to the first argument in the list. the pann N parameter
              should be the last fixed argument passed to the function.
              Once va_startO has been called, va_argO may be called
              repeatedly to fetch arguments sequentially from the argument
              list. The type parameter to va_argO should be the C-data type
              of the next argument (Le" int, lens, char x, etc.). va_argO returns
              the value of the argument.
              When variable-argument processing is completed, the
              va_endO macro should be called.




           va_arg, va_end, va_start (C) - Variable Arguments
                                  Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            vfprintf (C) - Standard I/O                              ANSI


NAME            vfprintf - write formatted ASCII data to a stream


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdarg.h>
                   #include <stdio.h>
                   int vfprintf (FILE "stream,
                      const char "fmt, va_list args);

DESCRIPTION vfprintfO is equivalent to the fprintfO function, except that the
                variable argument list is replaced by args. args should be ini-
                tialized by the va_startO macro before the call to vfprintfO is
                made.
                The return value of vfprintfO is equal to the number of char-
                acters written or is a negative value if a write error occurs.


SEE ALSO        vprintfO, vsprintfO, printfO, va_startO




       vfprintf (C) - Standard I/O
                                 Library Functions



TYPE            vprintf (C) - Standard 110                                    ANSI


NAME            vprintf - write formatted ASCII data to stdout


SYNOPSIS          #include <stdarg.h>
                  #include <stdio.h>
                  int vfprintf (FILE *stream,
                     const char *fmt, va_list args)

DESCRIPTION vprintfO is equivalent to the printfO function, except that the
                variable argument list is replaced by args. args should be ini-
                tialized by the va_start() macro before the call to vprintfO is
                made.
                The return value of vprintfO is equal to the number of charac-
                ters written or is a negative value if an error occurred in au tpu t.


SEE ALSO        vfprintO, vsprintfO, printfO, va_startO




                                               vprintf (e) - Standard 1/0
                                 Aztec C Library Manual



TYPE            vsprintf (C) - Conversion                               ANSI


NAME            vsprintf - write formatted ASCII data to a buffer


SYNOPSIS           #include <stdarg.h>
                   #include <stdio.h>
                   int vsprintf (char ·buf, const char ·fmt,
                      va_list args);

DESCRIPTION vsprintfO is equivalent to the sprintfO function, except that the
                variable argument list is replaced by args. args should be ini-
                tialized by the va_startO macro before the call to vsprintfO is
                made.
                The return value of vsprintfO is the number of characters
                written, not including the terminating null characters.


SEE ALSO        vfprintfO, vprintfO, printfO, va_start()




       vsprintf (C) - Conversion
                              Library Functions



TYPE                                                                  Amiga


NAME           _wb_parse - open standard I/O window


SYNOPSIS         void _wb_parse (struct Process *pp, struct
                    WBStartup *wbm)i

DESCRIPTION _wb_parseO is called from the _mainO routine and is used to
               open a window for standard I/O to use. The window is actual-
               ly defined by setting the ToolType, WINDOW, to the desired
               window specification. If this is not required, this routine may
               be replaced by a stub in your main program. Note that even if
               this code is called by_mainO, if the WINDOW tool type is not
               defined, there will be no window.


EXAMPLE          WINDOW=CON:O/O/640/200/Test Window
                                   Aztec C            Manual



TYPE            write (0 - UNIX 110                                  Aztec/UNIX


NAME            write - write to a file or device using unbuffered I/O


SYNOPSIS          size_t write (int fd,      int bufsize, char
                     *bufti

DESCRIPTION writeO writes characters to a device or disk which has been
                previously opened by a call to openO or creatO. The characters
                are written to the device or file directly from the caller's buffer.
                fd is the file descriptor which was returned to the caller when
                the device or file was opened.
                buf is a pointer to the buffer containing the characters to be
                written.
                bufsize is the number of characters to be written.
                If the operation is successful, writeO returns as its value the
                number of characters written.


SEE ALSO        openO, closeO, readO


DIAGNOSTICS If the operation is unsuccessful, writeO returns -1 and places a
                code in the global integer errno.




       write (C) - UNIX I/O
               WORKBENCH



Chapter 4 - Workbench

Amiga Reference Guides
  This chapter only lists the Amiga Workbench function's parameters, types,
  and the type of value returned. For detailed information, refer to:
     • Amiga ROM Kernel Manual, Volumes 1 and 2. (Commodore Busi-
       ness Machines, Inc., Arniga Technical Reference Series, Addison-
       Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts)
     • Amiga ROM Kernel Reference Manual: Libraries and Devices. (Com-
       modore Business Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference
       Series, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Mas-
       sachusetts)
     • Amiga ROM Kernel Reference Manual: Exec. (Commodore Business
       Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference Series, Addison-Wes-
       ley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts)
     • Amiga Hardware Reference Manual. (Commodore Business
       Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference Series, Addison-Wes-
       ley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts)
     • Amiga Intuition Reference Manual. (Commodore Business
       Machines, Inc., Amiga Technical Reference Series, Addison-Wes-
       ley Publishing Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts)
  These manuals should be available through your local bookstore. Refer to
  the section "Suggestions for Further Reading" at the front of your Aztec C
  User Guide for a listing of other helpful resources.
                   Aztec C           Manual



  If you are using Amiga Workbench routines, you should read material
  relating to the Amiga Workbench functions, the functions.h header, and
  direct resident library calls, in the Getting Started Chapter of the Aztec C
  User Guide and the Compiler Chapter of the Aztec C Reference Manual.

Amiga Workbench Functions
       void AbortIO(ioRequest)
            struct IORequest *ioRequest;
       long ActivateGadget(gadgets, window, req)
            struct Gadgets *gadgets;
            struct Window *window;
            struct Requester *req;
       void ActivateWindow(window)
            struct Window *window;
       void AddAnimOb(anOb, anKey, rPort)
            struct AnimOb *anOb, **anKey;
            struct RastPort *rPort;
       void Add Bob (bob, rPort)
            struct Bob *bob;
            struct RastPort *rPort;
       void AddConfigDev(configdev)
            struct ConfigDev *configdev;
       void AddDevice(device)
            struct Device *device;
       long AddDosNode(bootpri, flags,*dosnode)
            long bootpri, flags;
            struct DeviceNode *dosnode;
       void AddFont(textFont)
            struct TextFont *textFont;
       long AddFreeList(free, mem, len)
            struct FreeList *free;
            char*mem;
            long len;
                                     Workbench



long AddGadget(pntr, gadget, position)
     struct Window ""pntr;
     struct Gadget ""gadget;
     long position;
long AddGList(addptr, gadget, pos, numgad, req)
     struct Window ""addptr;
     struct Gadget ""gadget;
     long pos, numgad;
     struct Requester ""req;
void AddHead(list, node)
     struct List ""list;
     struct Node ""node;
void AddIntServer(intNum, interrupt)
     long intNum;
     struct Interrupt ""interrupt;
void AddLibrary(library)
     struct Library ""library;
long AddMemList(size, attrib, pri, base, name)
     long size, attrib, pri;
     void ""base;
     char ""name;
void AddPort(port)
     struct MsgPort ""port;
void AddResource(resource)
     struct MiscResource ""resource;
void AddSemaphore(sigsem)
     struct SignalSernaphore ""sigsem;
void AddTail(list, node)
     struct List ""list;
     struct Node ""node;
void AddTask(task, initialPC, finalPC)
     struct Task ""task;
     void ""initialPC, ""finalPC;
           Aztec C Library Manual



void AddTime(dest, source)
     struct timeval *dcst, *sourcc;
void AddVSprite(vs, rPort)
     struct VSprite *vs;
     struct RastPort *rPort;
long Alert(alertNum, parameters)
     long alertNum, parameters;
void *AllocAbs(bytSiz, location)
     long bytSiz;
     void *location;
long AllocBoardMem(slotspec)
     long slotspec;
long AllocCList(cLPool)
     long eLPool;
struct ConfigDev *AllocConfigDevO
struet MemList *AllocEntry(memList)
     struct MemList *memList;
long AllocExpansionMem(numslots, SAlign, SOffsct)
     long numslots, SAlign, SOffset;
void *AllocMem(byteSize, requirements)
     long byteSize, requirements;
long AllocPotBits(bits)
     long bits;
void AllocRaster(width, height)
     long width, height;
void *AllocRemember(rememberKey, size, flags)
     struct Remember **rememberKey;
     long size, flags;
long AllocSignal(signaINum)
     long signalNum;
long AllocTrap(trapNum)
     long trapNum;
struct WBObject *AllocWBObjectO
                                        Workbench



void *Allocate(freeList, byteSize»
     struct MemHeader *freeList;
     long byteSize;
void AlohaWorkbench(wbPort)
     struct MsgPort *wbPort;
void AndRectRegion(region, rectangle)
     struct Region *region;
     struct Rectangle *rectangle;
long AndRegionRegion(sre, dst)
     struet Region *sre, *dst;
void Animate(key, rPort)
     struet AnimOb **key;
     struct RastPort *rPort;
long AreaCircle(rp, ex, cy, r)
     struet RastPort *rp;
     long cx, cy, r;
short AreaDraw(rp, x, y)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long x, y;
long AreaEllipse(rp, cx, ey, a, b)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long cx, cy, a, b;
void AreaEnd(rp)
     struet RastPort *rp;
long AreaMove(rp, x, y)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long x, y;
void AskFont(rp, textAttr)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     struct TextAttr *textAttr;
long AskSoftStyle(rp)
     struct RastPort *rp;
            Aztec C Library Manual



long AttemptLockLayerRom(layer)
     struct Layer *layeri
long AttemptSemaphore(sigsem)
     struct SignalSemaphore *sigsemi
long AutoRequest(window, body, positive, negative, posFlags,
     negFlags, width, height)
     struct Window *windowi
     struct IntuiText *body, *positive, *negativei
     long posFlags, negFlags, width, heighti
long AvailFonts(buffer, bufBytes, types)
     char *buffer;
     long bufBytes, typesi
long AvailMem(requirements)
     long requirementsi
void BeginIOCioRequest)
     struct IORequest *ioRequest;
void BeginRefresh(window)
     struct Window *windowi
long BeginUpdate(layer)
     struct Layer *layeri
long BehindLayerOi, layer)
     struct Layer_Info *lii
     struct Layer *layeri
long BltBitMap(srcBM, srcX, sreY, dstBM, dstX, dstY, sizX, sizY,
     minTerm, mask, tempA)
     struct BitMap *srcBM, *dstBMi
     long srcX, srcY, dstX, dstY, sizX, sizY, minTerm, maski
     char *tempA;
long BltBitMapRastPort(srcBitMap, srcX, srcY, dstRPort,
     dstX, dstY, sizX, sizY, minTerm)
     struct BitMap *srcBitMapi
     struct RastPort *dstRPorti
     long srcX, srcY, dstX, dstY, sizX, sizY, minTermi
                                      Workbench


void BltClear(memBloek, byteCount, flags)
     char *memBloek;
     long byteCount, flags;
long BltMaskBitMapRastPort(sreBitMap, srcX, sreY, dstRPort,
     dstX, dstY, sizX, sizY, minTerm, bltmask)
     struet BitMap *srcBitMap ;
     struet RastPort *dstRPort
     long srcX, sreY, dstX, dstY, sizX, sizY, minTerm;
     void *bltmask;
void BltPattem(rp, buf, xl, yl, maxX, maxY, byteCnt)
     struet RastPort *rp;
     char*buf;
     long xl, yl, maxX, maxY, byteCnt;
void BltTemplate(src, srcX, srcMod, dstRastPort, dstX, dstY,
     sizX, sizY)
     char *src;
     struet RastPort *dstRastPort;
     long srcX, srcMod, dstX, dstY, sizX, sizY;
void BNDRYOFF(rp)
     struct RastPort *rp;
struet Window *BuildSysRequest(wind, body, positive,
     negative, flags, width, height)
     struct Window *wind;
     struct IntuiText *body, *positive, *negative;
     long flags, width, height;
char *BumpRevision(newbuf, oldname)
     char *newbuf, *oldname;
void CBump(copperlist)
     struet UCopList *copperlist;
struct InputEvent *CDlnputHandler(events, eonsoleDevice)
     struet InputEvent *events;
     struet Device *eonsoleDevice;
           Aztec C Library Manual



void CEND(c)
     struct UCopList *c;
long Chk_AbortO
void CINIT(c, n)
     struct UCoplist *c;
     long n;
void CMove(c, a, v)
     struct UCopList *c;
     long *a, v;
void CWait(c, v, h)
     struct UCopList *c;
     long v, h;
void Cause(interrupt)
     struct Interrupt *interrupt;
void ChangeSprite(vp, s, newdata)
     struct ViewPort *vp;
     struct SimpleSprite *s;
     short *newdata;
struct IORequest *CheckIO(ioRequest)
     struct IORequest *ioRequest;
long ClearDMRequest(window)
     struct Window *window;
void ClearEOL(rp)
     struct RastPort *rp;
void ClearMenuStrip(window)
     struct Window *window;
void ClearPointer(window)
     struct Window *window;
long ClearRectRegion(rgn, rect)
     struct Region *rgn;
     struct Rectangle *rect;
void ClearRegion(region)
     struct Region *region;
                                          Workbench



void ClearScreen(rp)
     struct RastPort *rp;
void ClipBlit(src, srcX, srcY, dst, dstX, dstY, xSizc, ySize, mode}
     struct RastPort *src, *dst;
     long srcX, srcY, dstX, dstY, xSize, ySize, mode;
void Close(file)
     struct FileHandle *filc;
void CloseDevice(ioRequest)
     struct IORequest *ioRequest;
void CloseFont(font}
     struct TextFont *font;
void CloseLibraryOibrary}
     void *1ibrary;
void CloseScreen(screen}
     struct Screen *screen;
void CloseWindow(window}
     struct Window *window;
long CloseWorkBenchO
void CMOVE(c, a, b)
     struct UCopList *c;
     long a, b;
long CmpTime(dest, source)
     struct timeval *dest, *source;
long ConcatCList(sourceCList, destCList)
     long sourceCList, destCList;
long ConfigBoard(board, configDcv}
     long board;
     struct ConfigDev *configDev;
long ConfigChain(baseAddr}
     long baseAddr;
long CopyCList(cList)
     long cList;
            Aztec C Library Manual



void CopyMem(src, dest, size)
     char *src, *dest;
     long size;
void CopyMemQuick(src, dest, size)
     char *src, *dest;
     long size;
void CopySBitMap(layer)
     struct Layer *layer;
struct Layer *CreateBehindLayer(li, bm, xO, yO, xl, yl, flags, bm2)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
     struct BitMap *bm, *bm2;
     long xO, yO, xl, yl, flags;
struct FileLock *CreateDir(name)
     char*name;
struct IORequest *CreateExtlO(iorpt, size)
     struct MsgPort *iorpt;
     long size;
struct MsgPort *CreatePort(name, pri)
     char*name;
     longpri;
struct Process *CreateProc(name, pri, segment, stackSize)
     char*name;
     long pri, stackSize, segment;
struct IOStdReq *CreateStdIO(mp)
     struct MsgPort *mp;
struct Task *CreateTask(name, pri, start_pc, stksiz)
     char*name;
     long pri, stksiz;
     void *starcpc;
struct Layer *CreateUpfrontLayer(li, bm, xO, yO, xl, yl, flags, bm2)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
     struct BitMap *bm, *bm2;
     long xO, yO, xl, yl, flags;
                                      Workbench


struct FileLock *CurrentDir(lock)
     struct FileLock *lock;
void CurrentTime(seconds, micros)
     long *seconds, *micros;
void CWAIT(c, a, b)
     struct UCopList *c;
     long a, b:
long *DateStamp(v)
     long *v;
void Deallocate(freeList, memoryBlock, byteSize)
     struct MemHeader *freeList;
     void *memoryBlock;
     long byteSize;
void DebugO
void Delay(timeout)
     long timeout;
void DeleteExtlO(ioreq)
     struct IORequest *ioreq;
long DeleteFile(name)
     char*name;
void DeleteLayer(li, 1)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
     struct Layer *1;
void DeletePort(port)
     struct MsgPort *port;
void DeleteStdIO(iop)
     struct IOStdReq *iop;
void DeleteTask(tp)
     struct Task *tp;
struct Process *DeviceProc(name)
     char*name;
void DisableO
void DisownBlitterO
void DispatchO
           Aztec C Library Manual



void DisplayAlert(alertNumber, string, height)
     long alertNumber;
     char *string;
     long height;
void DisplayBeep(screen)
     struct Screen *screen;
void DisposeLayerInfo(li)
     struct Layer_Info *1i;
void DisposeRegion(region)
     struct Region *region;
void DoCollision(rPort)
     struct RastPort *rPort;
long DoIO(ioRequest)
     struct IORequest *ioRequest;
long DoubleClick(startSeconds, startMicros, currentSeconds,
     currentMicros)
     long startSeconds, startMicros,
     currentSeconds, currentMicros;
void Draw(rp, x, y)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long x, y;
void DrawBorder(rp, b, leftOffset, topOffset)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     struct Border *b;
     long leftOffset, topOffset;
void DrawCircle(rp, cx, cy, r)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long ex, cy, r;
void DrawEllipse(rp, ex, ey, a, b)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long cx, cy, a, b;
void DrawGList(rPort, vPort)
     struct RastPort *rPort;
     struct ViewPort *vPort;
                                      Workbench



void Drawlmage(rp, image, leftOffset, topOffset)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     struct Image *image;
     long leftOffset, topOffset;
struct FileLock *DupLock(lock)
     struct FileLock *lock;
void EnableO
void EndRefresh(window, complete)
     struct Window *window;
     long complete;
void EndRequest(req, wind)
     struct Requester *req;
     struct Window *wind;
void EndUpdate(l, flag)
     struct Layer *1;
     long flag;
void Enqueue(list, node)
     struct List *list;
     struct Node *node;
void ExceptionO
void ExitlntrO
long ExNext(lock, filelnfoBlock)
     struct FileLock *lock;
     struct FileInfoBlock *filelnfoBlock;
long Examine(lock, fileInfoBlock)
     struct FileLock *lock;
     struct FileInfoBlock *filelnfoBlock;
long Execute(commandString, input, output)
     char *commandString;
     struct FileHandle *input, *output;
void Exit(returnCode)
     long return Code;
void FattenLayerInfo(li)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
          Aztec C         Manual


struct ConfigDev *FindConfigDev(oldCnfdev, manu, prod)
     struct ConfigDev *oldCnfdev;
     long manu, prod;
struct Node *FindName(list, name)
     struct List *list;
     char*name;
struct MsgPort *FindPort(name)
     char*name;
struct Resident *FindResident(name)
     char*name;
struct SignalSemaphore *FindSemaphore(name)
     char*name;
struct Task *FindTask(name)
     char*name;
char *FindToollype(tooITypeArray, typeName)
     char **toolTypeArray, *typeName;
long Flood(rp, mode, x, y)
      struct RastPort *rp;
     long mode, x, y;
void FlushCList(cList)
     long cList;
void ForbidO
void FreeBoardMem(stslot, stspec)
     long stslot, stspec;
void FreeCList(cList)
     long cList;
void FreeColorMap(colorMap)
     struct ColorMap *colorMap;
void FreeConfigDev(configdev)
     struct ConfigDev *configdev;
void FreeCopList(copList)
     struct CopList *copList;
void FreeCprList(cprList)
     struct cprlist *cprList;
                                    Workbench


void FreeDiskObject(diskobj)
     struct DiskObject *diskobj;
void FreeEntry(memList)
     struct MemList *memList;
void FreeExpansionMem(stslot, numslots)
     long stslot, numslots;
void FreeFreeList(free)
     struct FreeList *free;
void FreeGBuffers(anOb, RPort, db)
     struct AnimOb *anOb;
     struct RastPort *RPort;
     long db;
void FreeMem(memoryBlock, sizeBytes)
     void *memoryBlock;
     long sizeBytes;
void FreePotBits(allocated)
     long allocated;
void FreeRaster(p, width, height)
     void *p;
     long width, height;
void FreeRemember(key, really Forget)
     struct Remember **key;
     long reallyForget;
void FreeS ignal(signaINum)
     long signalNum;
void FreeSprite(pick)
     long pick;
void FreeSysRequest(wind)
     struct Window *wind;
void FreeTrap(trapNum)
     long trapNum;
void FreeVPortCopLists(viewPort)
     struct ViewPort *viewPort;
            Aztec C Library Manual



void FreeWBObject(obj)
     struct WBObject *obj;
long GetCCO
long GetCLBuf(cList, buffer, maxlength)
     long cList;
     char *buffer;
     long maxlength;
long GetCLChar(cList)
     long cList;
long GetCLWord(cList)
     long cList;
struct ColorMap *GetColorMap(entries)
     long entries;
long GetCurrentBinding(currbd, bsize)
     struct CurrentBinding *currbd;
     longbsize;
struct Preferences *GetDefprefs(prefBuffer, size)
     struct Preferences *prefBuffer;
     long size;
struct DiskObject *GetDiskObject(name)
     char*name;
long GetGBuffers(anOb, rPort, db)
     struct AnimOb *anOb;
     struct RastPort *rPort;
     long db;
long GeUcon(name, icon, free)
     char*name;
     struct DiskObject *icon;
     struct FreeList *free;
struct Message *GetMsg(port)
     struct MsgPort *port;
long GetPacket(wait)
     long wait;
                                       Workbench



struct Preferences *GetPrefs(buffer, size)
     struct Preferences *buffer;
     long size;
long GetRGB4(colorMap, entry)
     struct ColorMap *colorMap;
     long entry;
long GetScreenData(buff, size, type, screen)
     char *buff;
     long size, type;
     struct Screen *screen;
long GetSprite(sprite, pick)
     struct SimpleSprite *sprite;
     long pick;
struct WBObject *GetWBObject(name)
     char*name;
void GraphicsReservedlO
void GraphicsReserved20
long IncrCLMark(cList)
     long cList;
long InfoOock, info Data)
     struct FileLock *lock;
     struct InfoData *infoData;
void InitAnimate(akey)
     struct AnimOb **akey;
void InitArea(arealnfo, buffer, maxVectors)
     struct Arealnfo *arealnfo;
     short *buffer;
     long maxVectors;
void InitBitMap(bm, depth, width, height)
     struct BitMap *bm;
     long depth, width, height;
long InitCLPool(cLPool, size)
     struct cLPool *cLPool;
     long size;
            Aztec C Library Manual



void InitCode(startClass, version)
     long start Class, version;
void InitGMasks(anOb)
     struct AnimOb *anOb;
void InitGels(head, tail, gInfo)
     struct VSprite *head;
     struct VSprite *tail;
     struct Gelslnfo *gInfo;
void InitLayers(li)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
void InitMasks(vs)
     struct VSprite *vs;
void InitRastport(rp)
     struct RastPort *rp;
void InitRequester(req)
     struct Requester *req;
void InitResident(resident, segList)
     struct Resident *resident,
     long segList;
void InitSemaphore(sigsem)
     struct SignalSemaphore *sigsem;
void InitStruct(initTable, memory, size)
     short *initTable;
     void *memory;
     long size;
void InitTmpRas(tmpRas, buffer, size)
     struct TmpRas *tmpRas;
     char *buffer;
     long size;
void InitVPort(vp)
     struct ViewPort *vp;
void InitView(view)
     struct View *view;
                                  Workbench


struct FileHandle *Input()
void Insert(list, node, listNode)
     struct List *list;
     struct Node *node, *listNode;
struct Region *InstallClipRegion(layer, region)
     struct Layer *layer;
     struct Region *region;
long IntuiTextLength(iText)
     struct IntuiText *iText;
struct InputEvent *Intuition(inputEvent)
     struct InputEvent *inputEvent;
long IoErr()
long IsInteraclive(file}
     struct FileHandle *file;
struct MenuItem *ltemAddress{menuStrip, menuNumber)
     struct Menu *menuStrip;
     long menuNumber;
void LoadRGB4(vp, colorMap, count)
     struct ViewPort *vp;
     unsigned short *colorMap;
     long count;
long *LoadSeg(name)
     char*name;
void LoadView(view)
     struct View *view;
struct FileLock *Lock(name, accessMode)
     char*name;
     long accessMode;
long LockIBase(dontknow}
     long dontknow;
void LockLayer(li, 1)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
     struct Layer *1;
            Aztec C Library Manual



void LockLayerInfo(li)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
void LockLayerRom(layer)
     struct Layer *layer;
void LockLayers(li)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
struct DeviceNode *MakeDosNode(parmpacket)
     long *parmpacket;
long MakeFunctions(target, functionarray, dispbase)
     char *target, *dispbase;
     void(*functionarray[])O;
struct Library *MakeLibrary(vectors, structure, libInit,
     dataSize, segList)
     void(*vectors[])O,(*libInit)O;
     short *structure;
     long dataSize;
     struct MemList *scgList;
void MakeScreen(screen)
     struct Screen *screen;
void MakeVPort(view, viewPort)
     struct View *view;
     struct ViewPort *viewPort;
long MarkCList(cList, offset)
     long cList;
     long offset;
long MatchToolValue(typeString, value)
     char *typeString, *value;
void ModifyIDCMP(wind, IDCMPFlags)
     struct Window *wind;
     long IDCMPFlags;
                                       Workbench



void ModifyProp(gad, wind, req, flags, horizPot, vertPot,
     horizBody, verBody)
     struct Gadget *gad;
     struct Window *wind;
     struct Requester *req;
     long flags, horizPot, vertPot, horizBody, verBody;
void Move(rp, x, y)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long x, y;
long MoveLayerOi, I, dx, dy)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
     struct Layer *1;
     long dx, dy;
long MoveLayerInFrontOf(layer, linf)
     struct Layer *layer, *linf;
void MoveScreen(screen, deltaX, deltaY)
     struct Screen *screen;
     long deltaX, deltaY;
void MoveSprite(vp, sprite, x, y)
     struct View Port *vp;
     struct SimpleSprite *sprite;
     long x, y;
void MoveWindow(wind, deltaX, deltaY)
     struct Window *wind;
     long deltaX, deltaY;
void MrgCop(view)
     struct View *view;
struct Layer_Info *NewLayerInfoO
void NewListOist)
     struct List *list;
           Aztec C Library Manual



void NewModifyProp(gadg, ptr, req, flags, hp, vp, hb, vb, numgad)
     stmct Gadget *gadg;
     stmct Window *ptr;
     stmct Requester *req;
     long hp, vp, hb, vb, numgad, flags;
stmct Region *NewRegionO
void ObtainConfigBindingO
void ObtainSemaphore(sigsem)
     stmct SignalSemaphore *sigsem;
void ObtainSemaphoreList(sslist)
     stmct List *sslist;
void OffGadget(gad, wind, req)
     stmct Gadget *gad;
     stmct Window *wind;
     stmct Requester *req;
void OffMenu(wind, menuNumber)
     stmct Window *wind;
     long menuNumber;
void *OldOpenLibrary(libName)
     char *libName;
void OnGadget(gad, wind, req)
     stmct Gadget *gad;
     stmct Window *wind;
     stmct Requester *req;
void OnMenu(wind, menuNumber)
     stmct Window *wind;
     long menuNumber;
stmct FileHandle *Open(name, accessMode)
     char*name;
     long accessMode;
long OpenDevice(name, unitNumber, ioRequest, flags)
     char*name;
     stmct IORequest *ioRequest;
     long unitNumber, flags;
                                    Workbench


struct TextFont *OpenDiskFont(textAttr)
     struct TextAttr *textAttr;
struct TextFont *OpenFont(textAttr)
     struct TextAttr *textAttr;
void OpenlntuitionO
void *OpenLibrary(libName, version)
     char *libName;
     long version;
struct MiscResource *OpenResource(resName, ver)
     char *resName;
     long veri
struct Screen *OpenScreen(newSereen)
     struct NewScreen *newScreen;
struct Window *OpenWindow(newWindow)
     struct NewWindow *newWindow;
long OpenWorkBenchO
void OrRectRegion(region, rectangle)
     struct Region *region;
     struct Rectangle *rectangle;
long OrRegionRegion(src, dst)
     struct Region *src, *dst;
struet FileHandle *OutputO
void OwnBlitterO
struct FileLock *ParentDir(lock)
     struct FileLock *lock;
long PeekCLMark(cList)
     long cList;
void Permit()
void PolyDraw(rp, count, array)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long count;
     short *array;
            Aztec C Library Manual



void PrintIText(rp, iText, leftEdge, topEdge)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     struct IntuiText *iText;
     long leftEdge, topEdge;
long Procure(semaport, bidMsg)
     struct Semaphore *semaport;
     struct Message *bidMsg;
long PutCLBuf(cList, buffer, length)
     long cList;
     char *buffer;
     long length;
long PutCLChar(cList, byte)
     long cList;
     long byte;
long PutCLWord(cList, word)
     long cList;
     long word;
long PutDiskObject(name, diskobj)
     char*name;
     struct DiskObject *diskobj;
long Putlcon(name, icon)
     char*name;
     struct DiskObject *icon;
void PutMsg(port, message)
     struct MsgPort *port;
     struct Message *message;
long PutWBObject(name, object)
     char*name;
     struct WBObject *object;
void QBSBlit(bsp)
     struct bltnode *bsp;
void QBlit(bp)
     struct bltnode *bp;
                                    Workbench



long QueuePacket(packet)
     long *packet;
void RawDoFmt(fstr, dstrm, putchp, putchd)
     char *fstr, *sdtrm;
     PVFputchp;
     long putchd;
void RawIOInitO;
long RawKeyConvert(events, buffer, length, keyMap)
     struct InputEvent *events;
     char *buffer;
     long length;
     struct KeyMap *keyMap;
long RawMayGetCharO
void RawPutChar(c)
     longc;
long Read(file, buffer, length)
     struct FileHandle *file;
     char *buffer;
     long length;
long ReadExpansionByte(board, offset)
     char *board;
     long offset;
long ReadExpansionRom(board, cdev)
     char *board;
     struct ConfigDev *cdev;
long ReadPixel(rp, x, y)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long x, y;
void RectFill(rp, xMin, yMin, xMax, yMax)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long xMin, yMin, xMax, yMax;
           Aztec C Library Manual



void RefreshGadgets(gad, wind, req)
     struct Gadgets "gad;
     struet Window "wind;
     struet Requester "req;
void RefreshGList(gadg, ptr, req, numgad)
     struct Gadget "gadg;
     struet Window "ptr;
     struet Requester "req;
     long numgad;
void RefreshWindow Frame(wind)
     struet Window "wind;
void ReleaseConfigBindingO
void ReleaseSemaphore(sigsem)
     struet SignalSemaphore "sigsem;
void ReleaseSemaphoreList(sigsem)
     struct List "sigsem;
void RemBob(bob)
     struet Bob "bob;
void RemConfigDev(edev)
     struct ConfigDev "edev;
long RemDevice(device)
     struct Device "device;
long RemFont(textFont)
     struct TextFont "textFont;
struet Node "RemHead(list)
     struct List "list;
void RemIBob(bob, rPort, vPort)
     struet Bob "bob;
     struet RastPort "rPort;
     struet ViewPort *vPort;
void RemIntServer(intNum, interrupt)
     long intNum;
     struet Interrupt "interrupt;
                                   Workbench



long RemLibrary(library)
     struct Library *library;
long RemoveGList(remptr, gadg, numgad)
     struct Window *remptr;
     struct Gadget *gadg;
     long numgad;
void RemPort(port)
     struct MsgPort *port;
void RemResource(resource)
     struct MiscResource *resource;
void RemSemaphore(sigsem)
     struct SignalSemaphore *sigsem;
struct Node *RemTail(list)
     struct List *list;
void RemTask(task)
     struct Task *task;
void RemVSprite(vs)
     struct VSprite *vs;
void RemakeDisplayO
void Remove(node)
     struct Node *node;
long RemoveGadget(wind, gad)
     struct Window *wind;
     struct Gadget *gad;
long Rename(oldName, newName)
     char *oldName, *newName;
void ReplyMsg(message)
     struct Message *message;
void ReportMouse(boolean, wind)
     struct Window *wind;
     long boolean;
long Request(req, wind)
     struct Requester *req;
     struct Window *wind;
           Aztec C Library Manual



void RescheduleO
void RethinkDisplayO
void ScheduleO
void ScreenToBack(screen)
     struct Screen *screen;
void ScreenToFront(screen)
     struct Screen *screen;
void ScrollLayer(li, I, dx, dy)
     struct Layer_Info *li;
     struct Layer *1;
     longdx, dYi
void ScrollRaster(rp, dx, dy, xMin, yMin, xMax, yMax)
     struct RastPort *rpi
     long dx, dy, xMin, yMin, xMax, yMax;
void ScrollVPort(vp)
     struct ViewPort *VPi
long Seek(file, position, mode)
     struct File Handle *filei
     long position, mode;
void SendIO(ioRequest)
     struct IORequest *ioRequest;
void SetAfPt(rp, pattern, size)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     unsigned short *patterni
     long sizei
void SetAPen(rp, pen)
     struct RastPort *rpi
     long pen;
void SetBPen(rp, pen)
     struct RastPort *rpi
     longpeni
                                       Workbench



void SetCollision(num, routine, gInfo)
     long num;
     void (*routine)O;
     struct Gelslnfo *gInfo;
long SetComment(name, comment)
     char *name, *comment;
void SetCurrentBinding(currb, bsize)
     struct CurrentBinding *currb;
     long bsize;
long SetDMRequest(wind, DMRequester)
     struct Window *wind;
     struct Requester *DMRequester;
void SetDrMd(rp, mode)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long mode;
void SetDrPt(rp, pattern)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long pattern;
long SetExcept(newSignals, signalMask)
     long newSignals, signal Mask;
void SetFont(rp, font)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     struct TextFont *font;
void *SetFunction(library, funcOffset, funcEntry)
     struct Library *library;
     long funcOffset;
     void (*funcEntry)O;
struct Interrupt *SetIntVector(intNumber, interrupt)
     long intNumber;
     struct Interrupt *interrupt;
void SetMenuStrip(wind, menu)
     struct Window *wind;
     struct Menu *menu;
            Aztec C Library Manual


void SetOPen(rp, pen)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long pen;
void SetPointer(wind, sp, height, width, xOffset, yOffset)
     struct Window *wind;
     short *sp;
     long height, width, xOffset, yOffset;
struct Preferences *SetPrefs(p, size, realThing)
     struct Preferences *p;
     long size, realThing;
long SetProtection(name, mask)
     char*name;
     long mask;
void SetRGB4(vp, n, r, g, b)
     struct ViewPort *vp;
     long n, r, g, b;
void SetRGB4CM(cm, i, r, g, b)
     struct ColorMap *cm;
     long i, r, g, b;
void SetRast(rp, pen)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long pen;
long SetSR(newSR, mask)
     long newSR, mask;
long SetSignalCnewSignals, signalMask)
     long newSignals, signalMask;
long SetSoftStyle(rp, style, enable)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     long style, enable;
long SetTaskPri(task, priority)
     struct Task *task;
     long priority;
                                     Workbench



void SetWindowTitles(wind, windowTitle, screenTitle)
     struct Window "wind;
     char "windowl1tle, "screenl1tle;
void SetWrMsk(rp, mask)
     struct RastPort "rp;
     long mask;
void ShowTitle(screen, showIt)
     struct Screen "screen;
     long showIt;
void Signal(task, signals)
     struct Task "task;
     long signals;
long SizeCList(cList)
     longcList;
long SizeLayer(li, I, dx, dy)
     struct Layer_Info "li;
     struct Layer "1;
     longdx, dy;
void SizeWindow(wind, deltaX, deltaY)
     struct Window "wind;
     long deltaX, deltaY;
void SortGList(rPort)
     struct RastPort "rPort;
long SplitCList(cList)
     long cList;
long SubCList(cList, index, length)
     long cList;
     long index, length;
void SubTime(dest, source)
     struct timeval *dest, "source;
void SumKickDataO
void SumLibrary(library)
     struct Library *library;
long SuperStateO
            Aztec C Library Manual



void SupervisorO
void SwapBitsRastPortClipRect(rp, cr)
     struct ClipRect *cr;
     struct RastPort *rp;
void SwitchO
void SyncSBitMap(layer)
     struct Layer *layer;
long Text(rp, string, count)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     char *string;
     long count;
long TextLength(rp, string, count)
     struct RastPort *rp;
     char *string;
     long count;
void ThinLayerInfo(li)
     struct Layer_Info *Ii;
long Translate(instring, inlen, outbuf, outlen)
     char *instring, *outbuf;
     long inlen, outlen;
long 'JYpeOfMem(addr)
     char *addr;
void UCopperListInit(copplist, nurn)
     struct UCopList *copplist;
     long nurn;
long UnGetCLChar(cList, byte)
     long cList;
     long byte;
long UnGetCLWord(cList, word)
     long cList;
     long word;
long UnLoadSeg(segment)
     long segment;
                                      Workbench



void UnLock(lock)
     struct FileLock "'lock;
void UnLocldBase(Iblock)
     long Iblock;
long UnPutCLChar(cList)
     long cList;
long UnPutCLWord(cList)
     long cList;
void UnlockLayer(l)
     struct Layer "'1;
void UnlockLayerInfo(li)
     struct Layer_Info "'Ii;
void UnlockLayerRom(layer)
     struct Layer "'Iayer;
void UnlockLayers(li)
     struct Layer_Info "'Ii;
long UpfrontLayer(li, 1)
     struct Layer_Info "'Ii;
     struct Layer *1;
void UserState(sysStack)
     void *sysStack;
void Vacate(semaport)
     struct Semaphore "'semaport;
long VBeamPos()
struct View "'ViewAddressO
struct View "'ViewPortAddress(wind)
     struct Window "'wind;
long WBenchToBackO
long WBenchToFrontO
long Wait(signaISet)
     long signalSet;
void WaitBOVP(viewPort)
     struct ViewPort *viewPort;
void WaitBlit()
          Aztec C Library Manual


 long WaitForChar(file, timeout)
      struct FileHandle *file;
      long timeout;
 long WaiUO(ioRequest)
      struct IORequest *ioRequest;
 struct Message *WaitPort(port)
      struct MsgPort *port;
 void WaitTOFO
 struct Layer *WhichLayerOi, x, y)
      struct Layer_Info *li;
      long x, y;
 long WindowLimits(wind, minWidth, minHeight, maxWidth,
      maxHeight)
      struct Window *wind;
      long minWidth, minHeight, maxWidth, maxHeight;
 void WindowToBack(wind)
      struct Window *wind;
 void WindowToFront(wind)
      struct Window *wind;
 long Write(file, buffer, length)
      struct FileHandle *file;
      char *buffer;
      long length;
 long WriteExpansionByte(board, offset, byte)
      char *board;
      long offset, byte;
 void WritePixel(rp, x, y)
      struct RastPort *rp;
      long x, y;
 void WritePotgo(word, mask)
      long word, mask;
 void XorRectRegion(region, rectangle)
      struct Region *region;
      struct Rectangle *rectangle;
long XorRegionRegion(src, dst)
     struct Region *src, *dst;
                                              Index

    _eli_parse, 3-26
    _exit, 3-39
    _stkchk,3-161
    _stkover, 3-162
    _wb_parse, 3-195

A
    abort, 3-9
    abort tasks, 3-9
    aborting programs, 2-8
    abs, 3-10
    access, 2-15
        errno, 3-12
        mode, 3-11
    accessing devices
         unbuffered I/O, 2-3
        standard 1/0,2-3
    accessing files, 2-10
         unbuffered I/O, 2-3
        standard I/O, 2-3
    acos, 3-13
    allocate memory, 3-99
    allocate memory space, 3-135
    allocate space from system memory, 3-23
    Amiga functions
        _eli_parse, 3-26
        _wb_parse, 3-195
        dos_packet, 3-36
        execl,exeelp,execv,execvp, 3-37
        fexeel, 3-48
        fexecv, 3-48
        freeseg, 3-67
        geta4,3-78
        int_end,3-85
        int_start, 3-86
  scdir,3-141
  scr_beep,3-142
  scr_bs,3-142
  scr_cdelete,3-142
  scr_cinsert,3-142
  scr_clear, 3-142
  scr_cr,3-142
  scr_curs,3-142
  scr_cursrt,3-142
  scr_cursup,3-142
  scr_eol,3-142
  scr_home,3-142
  scr_ldelete,3-142
  scr_lf,3-142
  scr_linsert,3-142
  scr_tab,3-142
  segload, 3-144
Amiga I/O functions, 2-7
Amiga machine dependent functions, 3-87, 3-160
  See also Amiga functions
  _abort, 3-9
  _stkchk,3-161
  _stkover,3-162
  mktemp,3-105
  setenv,3-146
Amiga Rom Kernel Reference Manual, 2-7
Amiga standard I/O, 2-14
  buffer size, 2-14
amigados, 2-7 - 2-8
ANSI, I-I, 2-7
  standard I/O functions, 2-3
ANSI functions
  abs,3-10
  acos,3-13
  asctime,3-14
  asin,3-15
  assert, 3-16
  atan,3-17
  atan2,3-18
  atexit,3-19


                               ii
atof,3-20
atoi,3-21
atol,3-22
calloc, 3-23
ceil,3-24
clearerr, 3-25
clock,3-27
cos, 3-29
cosh,3-30
ctime, 3-33
difftime, 3-34
div,3-35
exit,3-39
exp, 3-40
fabs, 3-41
£Close, 3-42
feof,3-46
ferror, 3-47
fflush,3-51
fgetc, 3-52
fgetpos, 3-53
fgets, 3-54
floor, 3-56
fmod,3-57
fopen, 3-58
fprintf,3-62
fputc,3-63
fputs,3-64
fread,3-65
free, 3-66
freopen, 3-68
frexp, 3-69
fscanf, 3-70
fseek,3-71
fsetpos, 3-73
ftell,3-74
fwrite, 3-76
getc, 3-79
getchar, 3-80
getenv, 3-81


                 iii
gets, 3-82
gmtime, 3-83
isalnum,3-88
isalpha, 3-88
isascii, 3-88
iscntrl, 3-88
isdigit, 3-88
isgraph, 3-88
islower, 3-88
isprint, 3-88
ispunet, 3-88
isspaee, 3-88
isupper, 3-88
isxdigit, 3-88
labs, 3-90
Idexp,3-91
Idiv,3-92
loealtime, 3-93
log, 3-94
log1O,3-95
longjmp,3-96
malloe, 3-99
memehr,3-100
memcmp,3-101
memcpy,3-102
memmove,3-103
memset, 3-104
mktime,3-107
modf,3-108
perror,3-113
pow, 3-115
printf, 3-116
pute,3-122
putehar,3-123
puts, 3-124
rand, 3-128
realloe, 3-130
remove, 3-131
rename, 3-132
rewind, 3-133


                  iv
scanf,3-136
setbuf,3-145
setjmp,3-147
setvbuf,3-148
signal, 3-150
sin, 3-153
sinh, 3-154
sprintf, 3-155
sqrt,3-156
srand, 3-158
sscanf,3-159
strcat, 3-163
strchr,3-164
strcmp,3-165
strcoll, 3-167
strcpy, 3-168
strcspn, 3-169
strlen,3-170
strncat,3-171
strncmp,3-172
strncpy, 3-173
strpbrk,3-174
strrchr, 3-175
strspn,3-176
strstr, 3-177
strtod, 3-178
strtok,3-179
strxfrm, 3-181
tan, 3-182
tanh, 3-183
time, 3-184
tmpfile, 3-185
tmpnam, 3-186
tolower,3-187
toupper, 3-188
ungetc, 3-189
va_arg,3-191
va_end, 3-191
va_start, 3-191
vfprintf, 3-192


                  v
       vprintf,3-193
       vsprintf, 3-194
    asctime, 3-14
    asin, 3-15
    assert, 3-16
    assign buffer to I/O stream, 3-145, 3-148
    atan, 3-17
    atan2,3-18
    atexit, 3-19
    atof, 3-7, 3-20
       example, 3-20
    atoi,3-21
       example, 3-21
    atol,3-22
       example, 3-22
    Aztec functions
       access, 3-11
       close, 3-28
       cotan, 3-31
       creat, 3-32
        fexecl, 3-48
        fexecv, 3-48
        fileno, 3-55
        format, 3-61
        index, 3-84
        Iseek,3-97
        movrnem, 3-109
        open, 3-110
        qsort, 3-125
        ran, 3-127
        read,3-129
        rindex, 3-134
        sbrk,3-135
        sran, 3-157
        unlink, 3-190
        write, 3-196

B
    block operation functions
       memchr, 3-100


                                     vi
       memcmp,3-101
       memcpy, 3-102
       memmove, 3-103
       memset, 3-104
       movrnem,3-109
    buffer, 2-12, 2-15
       default size, 2-11
    buffered 1/0,2-11,2-14

c
    c.lib, 2-2, 3-7
    c32.lib,3-7
    c8.lib,3-7
    calloc, 2-20, 3-23
    ceil, 3-24
    change file position, 3-97
    character classification functions, 3-88
        compiler option usage, 3-89
    character name length, 2-2
    character type function type, 3-88
    character-oriented input, 2-17
    clear end of file conditions in stream, 3-25
    clear error conditions in a stream, 3-25
    clearerr, 2-11, 2-13,3-25
    clock, 3-27
    close, 2-15 - 2-16,3-28
    close a device or file, 3-28
    closing files, 2-12
    closing streams, 2-10,3-42
    command line arguments, 2-4, 2-8
    compare memory, 3-101
    compare two strings, 3-165, 3-167, 3-172
    compute exponential function, 3-40
    compute integer, 3-56
    compute logarithm, 3-94 - 3-95
    compute quotient, 3-92
    compute quotient of two integers, 3-35
    compute square root, 3-156
    compute the difference between two times, 3-34
    compute the smallest integer, 3-24


                                   vii
concatenate two strings, 3-163, 3-171
console 1/0,2-6, 2-17
console input
   RAW mode, 2-19
conversion function type, 3-155
conversion functions
   atof,3-20
   atoi,3-21
   atol,3-22
   format, 3-61
   ftoa, 3-75
   sprintf, 3-155
   sscanf, 3-159
   strtod, 3-178
   tolower, 3-187
   toupper, 3-188
   vsprintf,3-194
convert a calendar time, 3-83
convert a string to a double, 3-178
convert a time value to an ASCII string, 3-33
convert an ASCII string to a signed integer, 3-21
convert an ASCII string to a signed long val, 3-22
convert ASCII string to a double number, 3-20
convert character to lower case, 3-187
convert character to upper case, 3-188
convert floating point number, 3-75
convert time, 3-93, 3-107
copy a memory block, 3-109
copy block of bytes, 3-102
copy block of memory, 3-103
copy one string to another, 3-168, 3-173
cos, 3-29
cosh,3-30
cotan, 3-31
   error codes, 3-31
creat, 2-15
create a new file, 3-32
create name for temporary file, 3-186
create temporary file, 3-185
ctime, 3-33


                                viii
D
    deallocate memory block, 3-66
    deallocate memory space, 3-135
    delete a file, 3-131
    determine accessibility of file or function, 3-11
    determine time intervals, 3-27
    device I/O, 2-6,2-8,2-17
        ioctl,3-87
    devices
        opening, 2-10
    devices,opening
        See opening devices
    difftime, 3-34
    div,3-35
    div_ttype
        defined, 3-35
    documentation, 1-1
    dos_packet, 3-36
    dynamic allocation of standard I/O buffers, 2-21
    dynamic buffer allocation, 2-20 - 2-21

E
    end-of-file
        testing for, 3-46
    erase file, 3-190
    errno, 2-11, 2-16, 2-21 - 2-22
    error, 2-11, 2-21
    error codes,system independent
       E2BIG,2-23
       EACCE5,2-23
       EAGAIN, 2-23
       EBADF,2-23
       EOOM,2-23
       EEXI5T,2-23
       EINVAL,2-23
       EIO,2-23
       EMFILE, 2-23
       ENFILE,2-23
       ENOENT, 2-23


                                     ix
       ENOEXEC,2-23
       ENOMEM, 2-23
       ENOSPC, 2-23
       ENOTIY,2-23
       ERANGE, 2-23
       EROFS,2-23
       mCOEV, 2-23
    error flag, 2-22
    error processing, 2-21 - 2-22
    errors
       global integer, 2-11
    execl,3-37
    execlp, 3-37
    execute a goto, 3-96
    execv,3-37
    execvp,3-37
    exit, 2-8, 2-10, 3-39
    exiting programs, 2-8,3-39
    exp,3-40
       error codes, 3-40

F
    fabs,3-41
    fclose, 2-10, 2-12 - 2-13, 3-42
    fdopen, 2-7, 2-9, 2-13, 3-43
        example, 3-44 - 3-45
        modes, 3-43 - 3-44
    feof, 2-11, 2-13,3-46
    ferror,2-11 - 2-13, 3-47
    fexec functions
        parameters, 3-48
    fexecl, 3-48
    fexecv, 3-48
    fflush, 2-13, 3-51
    fgetc, 2-13, 3-52
    fgetpos, 2-13,3-53
    fgets, 2-13, 3-54
    file descriptor, 2-18
        defined, 2-15
    file I/O, 2-8, 2-16


                                      x
    opening files, 2-6
    random access, 2-5
    sequential access, 2-5
file pointer
    defined, 2-9
fileno, 2-7, 2-13, 3-55
files, opening
    See opening files
find a character, 3-100
find character in a string, 3-84
find last occurence of character in a string, 3-134
flags, 2-11
float math functions, 3-182
    acos,3-13
    asin,3-15
    atan,3-17
    atan2,3-18
    ceil, 3-24
    cos, 3-29
    cosh, 3-30
    cotan,3-31
    exp,3-40
    fabs,3-41
    floor, 3-56
    fmod,3-57
    frexp,3-69
    Idexp,3-91
    log, 3-94
    log10,3-95
    modf,3-108
    pow, 3-115
    ran, 3-127
    sin, 3-153
    sinh, 3-154
    sqrt,3-156
    sran,3-157
    tanh, 3-183
floor, 3-56
flush an I/O stream, 3-51
fmod,3-57


                                  xi
    fopen, 2-9, 2-13,3-58
    fonnat, 3-61
    fonnatted output, 3-116
    fprintf, 2-13, 3-62
    fputc, 2-13, 3-63
    fputs, 2-13, 3-64
    fread, 2-13,3-65
    free, 2-11, 2-20, 3-66
    freeseg,3-67
    freopen, 2-9, 2-13
    frexp, 3-69
    fscanf, 2-13, 3-70
    fseek, 2-5, 2-10 - 2-11,2-14,3-71
        example, 3-72
    fsetpos, 2-14, 3-73
    ftell, 2-14, 3-74
    ftoa, 3-75
        example, 3-75
    fwrite, 2-14, 3-76
        example, 3-76 - 3-77

G
    generate floating point random numbers, 3-127
    get string of characters from stream, 3-54
    geta4,3-78
    getc, 2-14, 3-79
    getchar, 2-13,3-80
    getenv, 3-81
    gets, 2-13, 3-82
    getw,2-14
    global integer, 2-11
    global names, 2-2
    gmtime, 3-83

H
    header files, 2-10, 2-18
    heap, 2-11, 2-20
    hyperbolic functions
       cosh,3-3O


                                        xii
   sinh,3-154
   tanh,3-183


I/O
    Amiga, 2-5 - 2-7
    Amiga standard, 2-9, 2-14
    Aztec C, 2-5 - 2-7
    Aztec standard, 2-9
    buffered, 2-11, 2-14
    console, 2-17
    device, 2-6, 2-8, 2-17
    dual access calls, 2-6
    file, 2-8, 2-16
    random, 2-5, 2-10
    sequential,2-10
    standard, 2-3, 2-12, 2-14, 2-21
    testing for errors, 3-47
    unbuffered, 2-3, 2-14, 2-21
I/O calls
    dual access, 2-7
index, 3-84
indicate function to be called at program end, 3-19
initialize seed value used by rand, 3-158
input
    console, using RAW mode, 2-19
inCend,3-85
int_start, 3-86
integer math functions
    abs, 3-10
    div, 3-35
    labs, 3-90
    ldiv, 3-92
    rand,3-128
    srand, 3-158
integer sizes, 2-2
interrupt handlers, 3-85 - 3-86
ioctl, 2-6, 2-8, 2-15, 2-18, 3-87
isalnum, 3-88
isalpha, 3-88


                                xiii
    isascii, 3-88
    isatty, 2-15
    iscntrl, 3-88
    isdigit, 3-88
    isgraph, 3-88
    islower, 3-88
    isprint, 3-88
    ispunct, 3-88
    isspace, 3-88
    isupper, 3-88
    isxdigit, 3-88

L
    labs, 3-90
    ldexp, 3-91
    ldiv, 3-92
    library functions
        description of return values, 3-7
        system dependent, 3-1
        system independent, 3-1
    library summary, 2-1
    hrialloc, 2-21
    load and start program, 3-37
    local time, 3-93
    log, 3-94
        error codes, 3-94
    log10, 3-95
        error codes, 3-95
    longjmp, 3-96
    lseek, 2-9, 2-15 - 2-16, 3-97
        examples, 3-98

M
    m.lib, 2-2, 3-7
    m32.lib, 3-7
    m8.lib, 2-2, 3-7
    ma.lib,2-2
    make unique file name, 3-105
    malloc, 2-11, 2-20, 3-99


                                     xiv
    memchr,3-100
    memcmp,3-101
    memcpy, 3-102
    memmove,3-103
    memory allocation functions
       calloc,3-23
       free, 3-66
       malloc, 3-99
       realloc, 3-130
       sbrk,3-135
    memset,3-104
    mf.lib, 2-2,3-7
    miscellaneous functions
       _abort, 3-9
       _exit, 3-39
       _stkchk,3-161
       _stkover, 3-162
       assert, 3-16
       atexit,3-19
       execl,execlp,execv,execvp,3-37
       exit, 3-39
       getenv,3-81
       longjmp, 3-96
       qsort, 3-125
       setenv,3-146
       setjmp,3-147
    mktemp,3-105
       example, 3-105 - 3-106
    mktime,3-107
    modf,3-108
    movmem,3-109

N
    non-local transfer of control, 3-147
    nonconsole drivers, 2-17

o
    open, 2-9, 2-15 - 2-16,3-110
       examples, 3-111- 3-112


                                      xv
       modes, 3-59 - 3-60, 3-110
    open standard I/O window, 3-195
    opening devices, 2-10, 3-43, 3-58, 3-110
       unbuffered 1/0,2-15
    opening files, 2-6, 2-9 - 2-10, 3-43, 3-58, 3-110
       for unbuffered I/O, 2-15
       maximum, 2-7
       maximum number allowed, 2-3
    output packet, 3-36
    overview of Aztec C and Amiga error processing, 2-21- 2-22

p
    parse command line, 3-26
    perform formatted input conversion, 3-70,3-136,3-159
    perror, 2-14, 3-113
       error messages, 3-113 - 3-114
    pmode, 3-32
    pointer to an array
       example, 2-4
    positioning, 2-5
    pow, 3-115
    preopened devices, 2-4, 2-8
    print system error message, 3-113
    printf,2-13
       conversion specifiers, 3-116
       flags field, 3-117
       format string, 3-116
       linker options, 3-121
       precision field, 3-118
       size-mod field, 3-118
       type field, 3-119 - 3-120
       width field, 3-118
    push character back into input stream, 3-189
    putc, 2-14,3-122
    putchar, 2-13,3-123
    puterr, 2-13
    puts, 2-13,3-124
    putw, 2-14




                                   xvi
Q
    qsort, 3-125
       example, 3-125 - 3-126

R
    ran, 3-127
    rand, 3-128
    random 1/0,2-5,2-10
    random number functions
       ran, 3-127
        rand, 3-128
        sran,3-157
        srand, 3-158
    RAW mode, 2-17 - 2-18
    re-allocate an existing memory block, 3-130
    read, 2-9, 2-15 - 2-16, 3-129
        from a device or file, 3-129
        from stream, 3-65
        string of characters from stream, 3-82
    realloc, 2-20,3-130
    redirection strings, 2-5
    remove, 2-14, 3-131
    rename, 2-14 - 2-15
    rename a disk file, 3-132
    reopen a stream, 3-68
    reposition a stream's position indicator, 3-133
    return a pseudo-randon integer, 3-128
    return absolute value of a given number, 3-41
    return absolute value of a signed long, 3-90
    return character from a stream, 3-79
    return character from standard 1/ 0 stream, 3-52
    return character from stream, 3-80
    return current file position, 3-74
    return file descriptor, 3-55
    return file information, 3-160
    return hyperbolic sine of a double value, 3-154
    return hyperbolic tangent of a double value, 3-183
    return name of next file matching pattern, 3-141
    return pointer to a string, 3-81


                                   xvii
    return remainder of double value, 3-57
    return sine of a double value, 3-153
    return tangent of a double value, 3-182
    return the absolute value of a signed integer, 3-10
    return the arc sine of a double value, 3-15
    return the arc tangent of a double value, 3-17 - 3-18
    return the cosine of a double value, 3-13, 3-29
    return the cotangent of a double value, 3-31
    return the hyperbolic cos of a double value, 3-30
    return the length of a string, 3-170
    return time of day, 3-184
    rewind, 2-14
    rindex, 3-134

5
    s.lib, 2-2, 3-7
    save current file position, 3-53
    sbrk, 2-21,3-135
    seanf,2-13,3-136
        conversion characters, 3-138 - 3-140
        conversion specification, 3-137
        format string, 3-136
        matching conversion specifiers, 3-137
        matching ordinary characters, 3-137
        matching white space characters, 3-136
    scdir
        example, 3-141
    scr_beep,3-142
    scr_bs,3-142
    scr3delete,3-142
    scr_cinsert, 3-142
    ser_clear,3-142
    scr3r, 3-142
    scr_curs,3-142
    ser_cursrt, 3-142
    scr_cursup,3-142
    scr_eol,3-142
    scr_home,3-142
    scr_Idelete,3-142
    scr_H,3-142


                                    xviii
scr_linsert, 3-142
scr_tab,3-142
screen manipulation functions, 3-142
    descriptions, 3-143
search for first occurence of a character, 3-164
segload, 3-144
segment load, 3-144
segment unload function, 3-67
sequential I/O, 2-5, 2-10
set a block of memory to value, 3-104
set correct file position, 3-73
set environment variables, 3-146
set random number seed for ran, 3-157
set up a4 register, 3-78
setbuf, 2-11, 2-14, 3-145
setenv, 3-146
setjmp, 3-147
sets current location within a stream, 3-71
setvbuf, 2-14,3-148
    mode arguments, 3-148 - 3-149
sgjlags, 2-19
sgtty field, 2-19
signal
    handling, 3-150
signal function, 3-150
    example, 3-151 - 3-152
    func parameter, 3-150
    return values, 3-151
    sig parameter, 3-150
significant character name length, 2-2
sin, 2-21, 3-153
    error codes, 3-153
sinh,3-154
    error codes, 3-154
sort an array of records in memory, 3-125
sqrt, 2-21,3-156
sran, 3-157
srand, 3-158
sscanf, 3-159
stack check functions, 3-161- 3-162


                                  xix
standard error, 2-4
standard I/O, 2-3, 2-21
standard I/O buffers
   dynamic allocation, 2-21
standard I/O functions, 2-12, 2-14
   access, 3-11
   clearerr,3-25
   fclose, 3-42
   feof,3-46
   ferror, 3-47
   fflush, 3-51
   fgetc,3-52
   fgetpos, 3-53
   fgets,3-54
   fopen,3-58
   fprintf, 3-62
   fputc,3-63
   fputs,3-64
   fread, 3-65
   freopen, 3-68
   fscanf,3-70
   fseek,3-71
   fsetpos, 3-73
   ftell,3-74
   fwrite, 3-76
   getc,3-79
   getchar, 3-80
   gets, 3-82
   perror,3-113
   printf' 3-116
   putc,3-122
   putchar,3-123
   puts, 3-124
   remove, 3-131
   rename, 3-132
   rewind, 3-133
   scanf,3-136
   setbuf, 3-145
   setvbuf,3-148
   tmpfile, 3-185


                                xx
    tmpnam, 3-186
    ungetc, 3-189
    vfprintf, 3-192
    vprintf,3-193
standard input, 2-4
standard output, 2-4
stat, 3-160
stderr, 2-10
stdin, 2-10
stdout, 2-10
strcat, 3-163
strchr, 3-164
strcmp, 3-165
strcoll,3-167
strcpy, 3-168
strcspn, 3-169
stream
    closing, 2-10
    defined, 2-9
    I/O errors, 2-11- 2-12
string handling functions
    index, 3-84
    rindex, 3-134
    strcat, 3-163
    strchr, 3-164
    strcmp, 3-165
    strcoll, 3-167
    strcpy, 3-168
    strcspn, 3-169
    strlen, 3-170
    strncat, 3-171
    strncmp, 3-172
    strncpy, 3-173
    strpbrk,3-174
    strrchr, 3-175
    strspn, 3-176
    strstr, 3-177
    strtok,3-179
    strxfrm, 3-181
string searching, 3-169, 3-174 - 3-177, 3-181


                                  xxi
    strings
        compare two strings,3-16S, 3-167, 3-172
        concatenate two strings, 3-163, 3-171
        convert to a double, 3-178
        copy one string to another, 3-168, 3-173
        return the length of a string, 3-170
        search for first occurence of character, 3-164
        string searching, 3-169
        tokenize,3-179
    strlen, 3-170
    strncat,3-171
    strncmp,3-172
    strncpy, 3-173
    strpbrk,3-174
    strrchr, 3-175
    strspn,3-176
    strstr,3-177
    strtod,3-178
    strtok,3-179
    strxfrm,3-181
    system independent error codes
        See error codes, system independent

T
    tan, 3-182
    tanh, 3-183
    terminate calling program, 3-39
    test for an error, 3-47
    test for EOF condition, 3-46
    time, 3-184
    time functions
        asctime,3-14
        clock, 3-27
        ctime,3-33
        difftime, 3-34
        gmtime, 3-83
        local time, 3-93
        mktime,3-107
        time, 3-184
    tmpfile,2-14,3-185


                                      xxii
    tmpnam, 2-14, 3-186
    tokenize a string, 3-179
    tolower, 3-187
    toupper, 3-188
    translates a time value into an ascii string, 3-14

u
    unbuffered 1/0,2-3,2-21
    unbuffered I/O to nonconsole drivers, 2-17
    unbuffered I/O to the Console, 2-17
    unbuild real numbers, 3-69, 3-91,3-108
    ungetc, 2-14, 3-189
    UNIX, 2-14, 2-21
    UNIX I/O functions
       close, 3-28
       creat,3-32
       fdopen, 3-43
       fileno, 3-55
       ioctl,3-87
       Iseek,3-97
       mktemp,3-105
       open, 3-110
       read, 3-129
       stat, 3-160
       unlink, 3-190
       write, 3-196
    unlink, 2-15, 3-190
    using I/O
       examples, 2-19

v
    va_arg,3-191
    va_end, 3-191
    va_start, 3-191
    variable argument access, 3-191
    variable argument functions
       va_arg,3-191
       va_end, 3-191
       va_start, 3-191


                                      xxiii
    verify program assertion, 3-16
    vfprintf, 2-14,3-192
    vprintf, 2-13, 3-193
    vsprintf,3-194

w
    write, 2-9, 2-15 - 2-16, 3-196
    write a character to an I/O stream, 3-122
    write a character to I/O stream, 3-63
    write a character to the stdout stream, 3-123
    write a string to stdout, 3-124
    write formatted ASCII data, 3-192 - 3-194
    write formatted data, 3-61 - 3-62
    write formatted data to a buffer, 3-155
    write string to I/O stream, 3-64
    write to a file or device, 3-196
    write to a specified stream, 3-76
    writing system-independent programs, 2-18




                                     xxiv
       Aztec C UniTools
            for the
            Amiga
                   VersIon 5.0
                  October 1989




Copyright 1988, 1989 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.
                All Rights Reserved
                    Worldwide



                DISTRIBUTED BY:

              Manx Software Systems
                   P.O. Box 55
              Shrewsbury, NJ 07702
                 (201) 542-2121
USE RESTRICTIONS
  You are pennitted to install and use this product on a single computer.
  Multiple CPU systems require supplementary licenses.
  Before using any Aztec C68k products, the License Registration included
  with this product must be signed and mailed to:

                           Manx Software Systems
                                P.O. Box 55
                           Shrewsbury, NJ 07702

COPYRIGHT
  This software package and document are copyrighted ©1988, 1989 by Manx
  Software Systems. All rights reserved worldwide.
  No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, transcribed,
  stored in any retrieval system, or translated into any language without prior
  written pennission of Manx Software Systems.

DISCLAIMER
  Manx Software Systems makes no representations or warranties with
  respect to this product and specifically disclaims any implied warranties of
  merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose. Manx Software
  Systems reserves the right to modify the programs and revise the contents
  of the manual without obligation to notify any person of such revision or
  changes.

TRADEMARKS

  Aztec C68k, Manx AS, Manx LN, Z, and SDB are trademarks of Manx
  Software Systems. CP IM-86 and CP IM-80 are trademarks of Digital Re-
  search. MSDOS is a trademark of Microsoft. PCDOS is a trademark of IBM.
  UNIX is a trademark of AT&T Bell Laboratories. Macintosh and Apple II
  are trademarks of Apple Computer. Atari is a trademark of Atari Com-
  puters. Amiga is a trademark of Commoq.ore-Arniga.
Manual Revision History
      October 1989        Second Edition

      December 1988       First Edition
                                                                  Table of Contents

Chapter 1 - Overview
  Introduction ........................................... 1 - 1
  About This Manual ..................................... 1 - 2
  Technical Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1 - 3


Chapter 2 - Diff
          The Conversion List ..................................... 2 - 1
          Conversion Items ........................................ 2 - 2
      The Command Line ........................................ 2 - 2
        The Affected Lines ....................................... 2 - 3
        The -b Option ........................................... 2 - 4
         Differences Between the UNIX and Manx Versions of diff .... 2 - 4


Chapter 3 - Grep
  Description of grep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3 - 1
      OPTIONS ................................................. 3 - 3
      INPUT FILES .............................................. 3 - 3
      PATTERNS ................................................ 3 - 4
  Differences Between the Manx and UNIX Versions of grep . 3 - 7
      OPTION DIFFERENCES .................................... 3 - 7
      PATTERN DIFFERENCES ................................... 3 - 7
  Examples .............................................. 3 - 7
      SIMPLE STRING MATCHING ............................... 3 - 7
      MORE EXAMPLES ......................................... 3 - 8
Chapter 4 - Make
       Preview ................................................ 4 - 2
       Note to Previous Users ................................... 4 - 2
  The Basics ............................................. 4 - 2
       What make Does ........................................ 4 - 3
       The Makefile ............................................ 4 - 3
    Rl.JLES .................................................... 4-6
        make's Use of Rules ..................................... 4 - 6
        Example .................. , ............................. 4- 7
        Interaction of Rules and Dependency Entries ............... 4 - 8
  Advanced Features ..................................... 4 - 8
    Dependent Files ........................................... 4 - 8
     MACROS ................................................. 4-9
       Using Macros .......................................... 4 - 10
       Defining Macros in a makefile ........................... 4 - 10
       Defining Macros in a Command Line ..................... 4 - 11
       Macros Used by Built-In Rules ........................... 4 - 11
       Special macros ......................................... 4 - 11
     RULES ................................................... 4 -12
       Rule Definition ......................................... 4 - 12
       Built-in Rules .......................................... 4 - 14
     COMMANDS ............................................. 4- 14
       Allowed Commands ..................................... 4 -14
       Logging Commands and Aborting make .................. 4 - 15
       Long Command Lines .................................. 4 -15
       Makefile Syntax ........................................ 4-15
       Comments ............................................. 4-16
       Line Continuation ...................................... 4 - 16
       Starting make .... _..................................... 4 - 17
       The Command Line .................................... 4 - 18
       make's Standard Output ................................ 4 - 18


                                    ii
          Differences between the Manx and UNIX make Programs ... 4 - 19
  Examples ............................................. 4 - 20
          The makefile in the 'Iibc' Directory ....................... 4 - 21
          Makefile for the' sys' Directory ........................... 4 - 22
          Makefile for the 'mise' Directory ......................... 4 - 23


Chapter 5 - Z Editor
          Requirements ........................................... 5 - 2
          Components ............................................ 5 - 3
  Getting Started. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5 - 3
      CREATING A NEW PROGRAM ............................. 5 - 3
        The Screen .............................................. 5 - 4
        Modes of Z ............................................. 5 - 4
        Insert Mode ............................................. 5 - 4
        Exiting Z ............................................... 5 - 5
      EDITING AN EXISTING FILE ............................... 5 - 5
        Starting and Stopping Z .................................. 5 - 6
        Command Line Options .................................. 5 - 6
        The Cursor ............................................. 5 - 7
        Moving Around in the Text: Scrolling ...................... 5 - 7
        Moving Around in the Text: the Go Command .............. 5 - 8
        Moving Around in the Text: String Searching ............... 5 - 8
        Finely Tuned Moves ..................................... 5 - 9
        Deleting Text ............................................ 5 - 9
        More Insert Commands ................................. 5 - 10
        Summary .............................................. 5- 10
  More Commands ....................................... 5 - 11
      THE SCREEN ............................................. 5 -11
        Displaying Unprintable Characters ....................... 5 - 11
        Displaying Unes That Do Not Fit on the Screen ............ 5 - 11
        Commands ............................................ 5 - 12

                                                   iii
   Special Keys ........................................... 5 - 12
PAGING AND SCROLLING ................................ 5 - 12
SEARCHING FOR STRINGS ............................... 5 - 13
  Additional String-Searching Commands .................. 5 - 13
  Regular Expressions .................................... 5-14
  Enabling Extended Pattern Matching ..................... 5 - 15
LOCAL MOVES ........................................... 5 - 16
  Moving Around on the Screen: ........................... 5 - 16
  Moving within a Line ................................... 5 - 16
  Word Movements ...................................... 5 -17
  Moves within C Programs ............................... 5 - 18
  Marking and Returning ................................. 5 - 19
  Adjusting the Screen ..................................... 5 - 20
MAKING CHANGES ...................................... 5 - 20
  Small Changes ......................................... 5 - 20
  Operators for Deleting and Changing Text .................. 5 - 21
  Deleting and Changing Lines ............................ 5 - 22
  Moving Blocks of Text ................................... 5 - 23
  Duplicating Blocks of Text: the Yank Operator .............. 5 - 23
  Named Buffers ......................................... 5 - 24
  Moving Text between Files .............................. 5 - 25
  Shifting Text ........................................... 5 - 26
  Undoing and Redoing Changes .......................... 5 - 26
INSERTING TEXT ......................................... 5 - 26
   Additional Insert Commands ............................ 5 - 27
   Insert Mode Commands ................................. 5 - 27
   Autoindent ............................................ 5 - 28
MACROS ................................................ 5 - 28
  Immediate Macro Definition ............................. 5 - 28
  Examples .............................................. 5 - 29
  Indirect Macro Definition ................................ 5 - 31
  Reexecuting Macros .................................... 5 - 31


                                iv
       Wrapping Around During Macro Execution ............... 5 - 32
   EX-LIKE COMMANDS .................................... 5 - 32
      Addresses in Ex Commands ............................. 5 - 33
     The Substitute Command ............................... 5 - 34
      The c Option ........................................... 5 - 34
      The g Option ........................................... 5 - 34
      Examples .............................................. 5 - 35
      The "&" (Repeat Last Substitute> Command ................ 5 - 35
    QUIKFIX COMMANDS .................................... 5 - 36
    THE OPTION FILE ........................................ 5 - 36
The ZOPT Environment Variable ....................... 5 - 37
        Setting Options for a File ................................ 5 - 37
    STARTING AND STOPPING Z ............................. 5 - 37
      Starting Z ............................................. 5 - 38
      Starting Z without a Filename ............................ 5 - 38
      Starting Z with a List of Files ............................. 5 - 38
      Stopping Z ............................................ 5 - 39
    ACCESSING FILES ........................................ 5 - 39
      Filenames ............................................. 5 - 40
      Writing Files ........................................... 5 - 40
      Reading Files .......................................... 5 - 41
      Editing Another File .................................... 5 - 41
      File Lists .............................................. 5 - 43
      Tags .................................................. 5 - 44
      The ctags Utility ........................................ 5 - 45
   OPTIONS ................................................ 5 - 45
   DIFFERENCES BETWEEN Z AND VI ....................... 5 - 47
Command Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5 - 49
       Starting Z ............................................. 5 - 49
       The Display ............................................ 5 - 49
       Options ............................................... 5 - 49


                                            v
Adjusting the Screen .................................... 5 - 49
Positioning within File .................................. 5 - 50
Marking and Returning ................................. 5 - 50
Line Positioning ......................... , .............. 5 - 50
Character Positioning .................... , ... , ......... ,5 - 51
Words and Paragraphs ............. " .................... 5 - 51
Insert and Replace ...................................... 5 - 51
Corrections During Insert ................ , .............. 5 - 52
Operators ............................................. 5 - 52
Miscellaneous Operations ............................... 5 - 52
Yank and Put .......................................... 5 - 52
Undo and Redo ........................................ 5 - 53
Macros ................................................ 5 - 53
QuikFix Commands .................................... 5 - 53
Colon Commands ...................................... 5 - 53




                             Vi
                   OVERVIEW



Chapter 1 - Overview

Introduction
  Welcome to UniTools--the perfect supplement to your Aztec C software
  development system! The utilities in UniTools work with Aztec C to give
  you tremendous programming power and flexibility.
  If you have purchased the Developer Level of Aztec C for the Arniga, then
  UniTool utilities and SDB have been included on your Aztec C disks.
  If, however, you have purchased the Professional Level of Aztec C for the
  Amiga,it does not include the make, grep, and diff portions of Unitools,
  even though the documentation for all of these utilities has been included
  here. However, please note: The Professional Level can be easily upgraded
  to the Developer Level. See page 4-4 of your Aztec C User Guide for
  information on how to contact the Update Department.
  UniTools includes the utilities diff, grep, make, and Z editor. Each of these
  important utilities is designed to greatly enhance your programming ef-
  ficiency, as follows:

     • The diff utility finds the areas of difference in your source files
       and tells you the changes that must be made to make the files
       identical.
                            Aztec C UniTools



     • The grep utility allows you to match patterns in your program
       and print the locations. This makes it easier for you to either
       search for, or reference, specific strings and function calls.

     • The make utility allows you to build large applications without
       the time-consuming process of using batch files that contain
       several compile and link command lines. This saves you from
       having to type command statements over and over.

     • The Aztec C Z editor is a powerful text editor that allows you to
       create and edit C source programs. The Z editor is similar to the
       UNIX vi editor.


About Th is Manual
  This manual describes the utilities, diff, grep, make, and Z, and gives the
  commands used in each. It also includes an index of keywords and subjects
  to make the information in the manual more accessible.
  Throughout this manual, we use the following conventions:
     input               to indicate data entered by the user(e.g., com-
                         mands, options, and functions)
     DEFINITION          small uppercase bold is used on terms that may
                         be new to the user; most likely will include ex-
                         planation or definition of term
     {choicell choice2} braces and a vertical bar mean that you have a
                        choice between two or more items
     placeholders        information that must be supplied by the user; for
                         example, filename, range, identifier,etc.
     output              to show text that is generated by the computer
     [optional]          to show optional information
               Aztec C Library Manual



Technical Support
  At Manx, we build dependability into our products. However, if you should
  find that you need help, rest assured that we provide it.
  Refer to your Aztec C Documentation for information on the technical
  support that Manx provides. If you have any problems with UniTools,
  follow the procedures outlined in the Technical Support chapter so that we
  may best be able to assist you.
                            DIFF


Chapter 2 - Diff
   The diff utility is designed to display differences between two text files. diff
   will show all differences between filel and file2, along with information on
   how to make them similar. diff will display the exact lines that are different
   between the two files, including the relative line numbers in the files.


                                       NAME

                        diff - Source file comparison utility

                                    SYNOPSIS

                                 diff [-b) filel file2



The Conversion List
   diff writes a conversion list to its standard output that describes the
   changes that need to be made to filel to convert it into file2. The list is
   organized into a sequence of items, each of which describes one operation
   that must be performed on filel.
                                Aztec C UniTools



Conversion Items
   There are three types of operations that can be specified in a conversion list
   item:

      • adding lines to filel from file2;
      • deleting lines from filel;
      • replacing (changing) filel lines with file2 lines.

   A conversion list item consists of a command line, followed by the lines in
   the two files that are affected by the item's operation.

The Command Line
   An item's command line contains a letter describing the operation to be
   performed: a for adding lines d for deleting lines, and c for changing lines.
   Preceding and following the letter are the numbers of the lines in filel and
   file2, respectively, that are affected by the command. If a range of lines in a
   file is affected, only the beginning and ending line numbers are listed,
   separated by a comma.
   For example, the following command line says to add line 3 of f ile2 after
   line 5 of filel:
       5a3
   and the next command line says to add lines 8, 9, and 10 of file2 after
   line 16 of filel
      16aB,10
   The next command line says to delete lines 100 through 150 from file1,
   and that the last line in file2 that matched a file1line was number 75:
       100, 150d75
   The following command says to replace (change) line 32 in file1 with
   line 33 in file2:
      32c33
   and the next command says to replace lines 453 through 500 in filel
   with lines 490 through 499 in file2:
       453,500c490,499
                  Diff



The Affected Lines
   As mentioned above, the lines affected by a conversion item's operation are
   listed after the item's command line. The affected lines from filel are listed
   first, flagged with a preceding <. Then corne the affected lines from file2,
   flagged with a preceding>. The filel and file2 lines are separated by the
   line


   For example, the following conversion item says to add line 6 of file2
   after line 4 of filel. Line 6 of file2 is "for (i=l; i<lO; ++i) n:
      4a6
      > for (i=l; i<lO;++i)
   Since no lines from filel are affected by an 'add' conversion item, only
   the file2 lines that will be added to filel are listed, and the separator
   line "--" is omitted.
   The following conversion item says to delete lines 100 and 101 from
   filel, and that the last file2 line that matched a filel line was
   numbered 110. The deleted lines were int a; and double b;. Only the
   deleted lines are listed, and the separator line "--" is omitted:
      100,101d110
      < int a;
      < double b;
   The following conversion item says to replace lines 53 through 56 in f ilel
   with lines 60 and 61 in file2. Lines 53 through 56 in filel are "if
   (a=b) {", n     d=a;"," a++;", and"}". Lines 60 and 61 of
   file2 are" if (a==b) " and "d = a++; "
      53,58c60,61
      < if (a=b) {
      < d = a;
      < a++;
      <
      > if (a==b)
      > d = a++;
                                 Aztec C UniTools



The -b Option
   Option -b causes diff to ignore trailing blanks (spaces and tabs) and to
   consider strings of blanks to be identical. If this option is not specified, diff
   considers two lines to be the same only if they match exactly. For example,
   if filel contains the line
       "abc$
   (" and $ stand for "the beginning of the line" and "the end of the line,"
   respectively, and are not actually in the file) and if file2 contains the
   line
       "abc      $
   then diff would consider the two lines to be the same or different, depend-
   ing on whether or not it was started with option -b.
   And diff would consider the lines
       "a             b c$

   and
       "a b c$
   to be the same or different, depending on whether or not it was started with
   option -b.
   diff will n~ver consider blanks to match a null string, regardless of whether
   -b was used or not. So diff will never consider the lines
       "abc$
   and
       "a bc$
    to be the same.

Differences Between the UNIX and Manx Versions of diff
   The Manx and UNIX versions of diff are actually most similar when the
   latter program is invoked with option -H. As with the UNIX diff when
   used with option -H, the Manx diff works best when changed stretches are
   short and well separated, and works with files of unlimited length.
              o iff

Unlike the UNIX diff, the Manx diff does not support option -E, -F, or -H.
Unlike the UNIX diff, the Manx version requires that both operands be
actual files. Because of this, the Manx version of diff does not support the
features of the UNIX version that allow one operand to be a directory name,
(to specify a file in that directory having the same name as the other
operand), and that allow one operand to be' -' (to specify the diff standard
input instead of a file).
                         GREP




Chapter 3 - Grep

Description of grep
  grep is a program, similar to the UNIX grep, that searches for a designated
  pattern within a specified group of files. The pattern can consist of charac-
  ters, strings, or a group of strings.


                                       NAME

                       grep - pattern matching program

                                    SYNOPSIS

                       grep [options] pattern [filel file2 ... ]



  For example, you could use grep to find the function hello, as follows:
     grep hello *.0

  This command would print out all of the files which reference hello.
                              Aztec C Unitools


grep will also allow you to search for patterns in particular places within a
file, such as at the beginning of lines or at the ends of lines.
grep will allow you to search multiple files for the pattern you specify. grep
usually takes two arguments: pattern, which indicates what you are look-
ing for, and filel, file2,etc. which defines the files you want to search.
filel,file2, etc. can be the name(s) of a specific file,or can contain wildcard
characters. For example, you can say:
     grep hel.l.o *.0
or
     grep hello mike.o
or
     grep hel.l.o mike.??l


The pattern choices cover a wide range, from simple to complex. For
example, you could specify as a pattern the letter m
     grep m *.h
the function name helloO
     grep hel.lo() *.0
or even "the name hello but only when it appears at the beginning of a line
and with nothing else on that line"
     grep Ahello$ *.0
where A means must start at beginning of the line, and $ means it is the
last item on the line. (See Figure 3.1.)
Typing grep on a line all by itself will cause it to search the standard input.
Thus, grep will return anything you type because it considers your key-
board its source of input.
OPTIONS
  The following options are supported by grep:
     -v     Print all lines that do not match the pattern.

     -c     Print just the name of each file and the number of match-
            ing lines that it contained.

     -1     Print only the names of the files that contain matching
            lines.

     -n     Precede each matching line that is printed by its relative
            line number within the file that contains it.

     -£     A character in the pattern will match both its upper- and
            lowercase equivalent.

INPUT FILES
  The files parameter is a list of files to be searched. If no files are specified,
  grep searches its standard input. Each filename can specify a single file to
  be searched. A name can also specify a class of files to be searched, using
  the special characters * and ? The character * matches any string of
  characters in a filename, and? matches any single character. For example,
     grep int main.c subl.c sub2.c
  searches main. C f subl. C f and sub2. c for the string int. The com-
  mand
     grep int *.c
  searches all files whose extension is c for the string int. The command
     grep int a*.txt b*.doc
  searches for the string int in each file (1) whose extension is txt and first
  character is a and (2) whose extension is .doc and first character is b. The
  command
     grep int sub?c
                                       Aztec C Unitools



  searches for the string int in each file whose filename contains four
  characters, the first three being sub, and whose extension is . c .


PATTERNS
  See Figure 3.1 for a brief synopsis of the special patterns you can use with
  grep.
  A pattern consists of a limited form of regular expression. It describes a set
  of character strings, any of whose members are said to be matched by the
  regular expression.


                             Special Patterns Used With grep
                matches anything except carriage return or new line
                matches anyone character within the brackets
                matches all characters except the ones within the brackets
     1\         matches a pattern only if it is the first item on the line
     $          matches a pattern only if it is the last item on the line.
     x*         matches 0 or more occurrences of the character x

                       Note: A backslash, \ , followed by any of the above
                           characters matches the specified character.

          Figure 3.1

~.



  Suppose you want to find all lines in the file prog.c that contain a four-char-
  acter string whose first and last characters are m and n, respectively, and
  whose other characters you do not care about. The command
     grep m .. n prog.c
  will do the trick, since the special character '.' matches any single character.
~   []


    Suppose that you wantto find all lines in the file file .doc that begin with
    a digit. The command
         grep ~[0123456789] file.doc
    will do just that. This command can be abbreviated as
         grep ~[O-9] file.doc
    And if you wanted to print all lines that do not begin with a digit, you could
    enter
         grep ~[~O-9] file.doc


~   $ and 1\


    Suppose you want to find the number of the line on which the definition
    of the function add occurs in the file arith. c. Entering
         grep -n add arith.c
    is not good, because it will print lines in which add is called, in addition
    to the line you are interested in. Assuming that you begin all function
    definitions at the beginning of a line, you could enter
         grep -n Aadd arith.c
    to accomplish your purpose.
    The character '$' is a companion to' "', and stands for "the end of the line."
    So if you wantto find all lines in file. doc that end in the stringtime,you
    could enter
         grep timeS file.doc
    And the following will find all lines that contain just . PP :
         grep ~ .PP$      file.doc
                                  Aztec C Unitools




    Suppose you want to find all lines in the file prog . c that contain strings
    whose first character is e and whose last character is z. The command
        grep e.*z prog.c
    will do that. The e matches an e, the * matches zero or more occurrences
    of the character that precedes it (in this case a "." which matches anything)
    and the z matches a z.



~   \

    There are occasions when you want to find the character '.' in a file, and do
    not want grep to consider it to be special. In this case, you can use the
    backslash character, '\', to tum off the special meaning of the next character.

    For example, suppose you want to find all lines containing
        .PP
    Entering
        grep .PP prog.doc
    is not adequate, because it will find lines such as
        THE APPLICATION OF
    since the'.' matches the letter A. But if you enter
        grep \.PP prog.doc
    grep will print only what you want.
    The backslash character can be used to tum off the special meaning of any
    special character. For example,
        grep '\\n' prog.c
    finds all lines in prog . c containing the string \n .
Differences Between the Manx and UNIX Versions
of grep
  The Manx and UNIX versions of grep differ in the options they accept and
  the patterns they match.

OPTION DIFFERENCES
     • Option -£ is supported only by the Manx grep.

     • Options -b and -s are supported only by the UNIX grep.

PATTERN DIFFERENCES
  Basically, the patterns accepted by the Manx grep are a subset of those
  accepted by the UNIX grep.

     • The Manx grep does not allow a regular expression to be sur-
       rounded by \( and \).

     • The Manx grep does not accept the construct \ {m \}.

     • The Manx grep does not allow a right bracket, ], to be specified
       within brackets.

Examples

SIMPLE STRING MATCHING
  The following command will search the files f ilel . txt and f i1e2 . txt
  and print the lines containing the word heretofore:
     grep heretofore fi1el.txt fi1e2.txt

  If you are not interested in the specific lines of these files, but just want to
  know the names of the files containing the word heretofore, you could
  enter
     grep -1 heretofore fi1el.txt fi1e2.txt
                                   Aztec C Unitools



  The above two examples ignore lines in which heretofore contains
  capital letters, such as when it begins a sentence. lne following command
  will cover this situation:
     grep -1f heretofore fi1el.txt fi1e2.txt
  grep processes all options at once, so multiple options must be specified in
  one dash parameter. For example, the command
     grep -1 -f heretofore fi1el.txt fi1e2.txt
  will not work.

MORE EXAMPLES
  If you wish to find all lines in a group of files with a . C extension which
  contain calls to sprintf and fprintf, but not printf, the command
     grep -n [fs]printf *.C
  will work.
  If, on the other hand, you wish to find only printf calls in your. c files,
  and not sprintf or fprint, then you can use this grep command:
     grep -n [Aa-z]printf *.C
  Suppose you need to see all calls to the function Lex, but only within if
  statements. You would enter
     grep if.*Lex *.c
  Finally,
     grep A[a-z,A-Z,_] [A i )]*)$ *.c

  will find all function definitions in your. c files, assuming that all defini-
  tions take place on one line and that a comment is not on the same line as
  the definition. This is how it works:
  1. The   A   states that the following pattern must be the first item on the line.
  2. [a-z, A-Z, _] states that the first character can only be a letter or a_.
  Preprocessor directive, like #include and similar statements, will not fit the
  pattern.
3. The pattern ["';) ] * says "do not match until you reach a ; or a ) ."
4. The ) $ pattern will only match a ) at the end of the line. If the previous
line matched anything other than a ), which could only be an end of line
or a ; , then the whole pattern will fail. In this way, only function definitions
which end in a ) will match.
                        MAKE


Chapter 4 - Make
  make is a program, similar to the UNIX program of the same name, whose
  primary function is to create, and keep up-to-date, files that are created from
  other files, such as programs, libraries, and archives. The make program
  discussed in this chapter is the Manx make.


                                      NAME

                     make - Program maintenance utility

                                   SYNOPSIS

                   make [options] [name1 name2 ... ]



  When told to make a file, make first ensures that the files from which the
  target file is created are up-to-date or current, recreating only the ones that
  are not. Then, if the target file is not current, make creates it.

  Interfiledependencies and the commands which must be executed to create
  files are specified in a file called the makefile, which you must write.
                                 Aztec C Unitools



   make has a rule-processing capability, which allows it to infer, without
   being explicitly told, the files on which a file depends and the commands
   which must be executed to create a file. Some rules are built into make; you
   can define others within the makefile.
   A rule tells make something like this:
      "a target file having extension .x depends on the file having the same
      basic name and extension .y. To create such a target file, apply the
      commands ...."
   Rules simplify the task of writing a makefile: A file's dependency informa-
   tion and command sequences need to be explicitly specified in a makefile
   only if this information cannot be inferred by the application of a rule.
   make has a macro capability. A character string can be associated with a
   macro name; when the macro name is invoked in the makefile, it is replaced
   by its string.

Preview
   The rest of this description of make is divided into the following sections:

          1. The basics
          2. Advanced features
          3. Examples

   Note to Previous Users
   One notable change has been implemented in this release of make: Default
   rules, when applied to files in other directories, will place the results in
   those other directories. Prior to Version 5.0, the results were placed in the
   current directory.


The Basics
   This section presents the basic features of make, with which you will be
   able to start using make. The second part of this chapter describes ad-
   vanced features of make.
   Before you can begin using make, you must know what it does, how to
   create a simple makefile that contains dependency entries, how to take
                                      Make



   advantage of make's rule-processing capability, and, finally, how to tell
   make to create a file. Each of these topics is discussed in the following
   paragraphs.

What make Does
   The main function of make is to make a target file "current," where a file is
   considered "current" if the files on which it depends are current and if it
   was modified more recently than its prerequisite files. To make at filecur-
   rent, make makes the prerequisite files current; then, if the target file is not
   current, make executes the commands associated with the file, which
   usually recreates the file.
   As you can see, make is inherently recursive: Making a file current involves
   making each of its prerequisite files current, making these files current
   involves making 'each 'of their prerequisite files current, and so on.
   make is very efficient: it only creates or recreates files that are not current.
   If a file on which a target file depends is current, make leaves it alone. If the
   target file itself is current, make will announce the fact and halt without
   modifying the target.
   It is important to have the time and date set for make to behave properly,
   since it uses the last modified times that are recorded in the 'files' directory
   entries to decide if a target file is not current.

The Makefile
   When make starts, it first reads a file, which you must create, called the
   makefile. By default, make assumes this file is named makefile, but this
   can be overridden using make's -f option. This file contains dependency
   entries defining interfile dependencies and the commands that must be
   executed to make a file current. It also contains rule definitions and macro
   definitions.
   In the following paragraphs, we describe only dependency entries. In the
   "Advanced Features" section of this chapter we discuss the somewhat more
   advanced topics of rule and macro definition.
   A dependency entry in a makefile defines one or more target files, the files
   on which the targets depend, and the operating system commands that are
   to be executed when any of the targets is not current. The first line of the
   entry specifies the target files and the files on which they depend; the line
                            Aztec C Unitools



begins with the target filenames, followed by a colon, followed by one or
more spaces or tabs, followed by the names of the prerequisite files.
Please Note:. It is important to place spaces or tabs after the colon that
separates target and dependent files; on systems that allow colons in
filenames, this allows make to distinguish between the two uses of the colon
character.
The commands are on the following lines of the dependency information
entry. The first character of a command line must be a tab or a space; make
assumes that the command lines end with the last line not beginning with
a tab or space.
For example, consider the following dependency entry:
   prog: prog.o subl.o sub2.0
      In -0 prog prog.o subl.o sub2.0 -lc
This entry says that the file prog depends on the files prog. 0, subl.o,
and sub2 .0. It also says that if prog is not current, make should execute
the In command. make considers prog to be current if it exists and if it has
been modified more recently than prog . 0, subl. 0, and sub2 . o.
The above entry describes only the dependence of prog on prog. 0,
subl .0, and sub2 . o. It does not define the files on which the .0 files
depend. For that, we need either additional dependency entries in the
makefile or a rule that can be applied to create .0 files from . c files.
For now, we will add dependency entries in the makefile for prog . 0,
subl .0, and sub2. 0, which will define the files on which the object
modules depend and the commands to be executed when an object module
is not current. Later we will modify the makefile to make use of make's
built-in rule for creating a .0 file from a . c file.
Suppose that the .0 files are created from the C source files prog. c,
subl . c, and sub2 . c; that subl . c and sub2 . c contain a statement to
include the file defs . h; and thatprog. c does not contain any #include
                                  Make



statements. Then the following long-winded makefile could be used to
explicitly define all the information needed to create prog
   prog: prog.o subl.o sub2.0
      1n -0 prog prog.o subl.O sub2.0 -lc
   prog.o: prog.c
      CC prog.c
   subl.o: subl.c defs.h
      cc subl.c
   sub2.0: sub2.c defs.h
      cc sub2.c

This makefile contains four dependency entries: for prog I prog. 0 I
subl .0, and sub2 . o. Each entry defines the files on which its target file
depends and the commands to be executed when its target is not current.
The order of the dependency entries in the makefile is not important.
We can use this makefile to make any of the four target files defined in it.
If none of the target files exists, and if the name of the makefile is makefile,
then entering
   make prog
causes make to compile and assemble all three object modules from their
C source files, and then create prog by linking the object modules together.
Suppose that you createprog and then modify subl . c. Then telling make
to make prog causes make to compile and assemble subl. c only, and
then recreate prog.
If you then modify defs . hi and tell make to create prog I make will
compile and assemble subl. c and sub2 . c , and then recreate prog.
You can tell make to make any file defined as a target in a dependency entry.
Thus, if you want to make sub2 .0 current, you could enter
   make sub2.0
                                 Aztec C Unitools



   A makefile can contain dependency entries for unrelated files. For example,
   the following dependency entries can be added to the above makefile:
      hello: hello.o
        In hello.o -lc
      hello.o: hello.c
        cc hello.c
   With these dependency entries, you can tell make to make hello and
   hello. 0, in addition to prog and its object files.


RULES
   You can see that the makefile describing a program built from many .0 files
   would be huge if it had to explicitly state that each .0 file depends on its .c
   source file and is made current by compiling its source file.
   This is where rules are useful. When a rule can be applied to a file that make
   has been told to make or that is a direct or indirect prerequisite of it, the rule
   allows make to infer, without being explicitly told, the name of a file on
   which the target file depends and/ or the commands that must be executed
   to make it current. This in tum allows makefiles to be very compact, only
   specifying information that make cannot infer by the application of a rule.
   Some rules are built into make; you can define others in a makefilc. In the
   rest of this section, we describe the properties of rules and how you write
   makefiles that make use of make's built-in rule for creating a .0 file from a
   .c file.

make's Use of Rules
   A rule specifies a target extension, source extension, and sequence of
   commands. Given a file that make wants to make, it searches the rules
   known to it for one that meets the following conditions:

       • The rule's target extension is the same as the file's extension;

      • A file exists that has the same basic name as the file make is
        working on and that has the rule's source extension.

   If a rule is found that meets these conditions, make applies the first such
   rule to the file it is working on, as follows:
                                     Make



      • The file having the source extension is defined to be a
        prerequisite of the file with the target extension;

      • If the file having the target extension does not have a command
        sequence associated with it, the rule's commands are defined to
        be the ones that will make the file current.

  One rule built into make, for converting .c files into .0 files, says
      "a file having extension .0 depends on the file having the same basic
      name, with extension .c. To make current such a .0 file, execute the
      command
           ccx.c
      where x is the name of the file."
   Another built-in rule exists for converting .asm files into .0 files, using the
   Manx assembler.

Example
  The.c to.o rule allows us to abbreviate the long-winded makefile shown
  above as follows:
      prog: prog.o subl.o sub2.0
         1n -0 prog prog.o subl.o sub2.0 -lc
      subl.o sub2.o: defs.h
  In this abbreviated makefile, a dependency entry forprog .0 is not needed;
  using the built-in .c-to-.o rule, make infers that the prog. 0 depends on
  prog. c and that the command cc prog . c will make prog . 0 current.
  The abbreviated makefile says that both subl .0 and sub2 .0 depend on
  defs . h. It does not say that they also depend on subl . c and sub2 . c,
  respectively, or that the compiler must be run to make them current; make
  infers this information from the .c to .0 rule. The only information given in
  the dependency entry is that which make could not infer by itself: that the
  two object files depend on defs. h.
                                Aztec C Unitools



Interaction of Rules and Dependency Entries
   As we showed in the above example, a rule allows you to leave some
   dependency information unspecified in a makefile. The prog. 0 entry in
   the long-winded makefile shown earlier in this section was not needed,
   because its information could be inferred by the .c to .0 rule. And the
   dependence of subl . 0 and sub2 .0 on their respective C source files, and
   the commands needed to create the object files was also not needed, since
   the information could be inferred from the .c to .0 rule.
   There are occasions when you do not want a rule to be applied; in this case,
   information specified in a dependency entry will override that which
   would be inferred from a rule. For example, the following dependency
   entry in a make file
      add.o:
        cc -DFLOAT add.c
   causes add. 0 to be compiled using the specified command rather than the
   command specified by the .c to .0 rule. make still infers the dependence of
   add. 0 on add. c, using the .c to .0 rule, however.


Advanced Features
   The last section presented the basic features of make to help you begin using
   make. This section presents the rest of make's features.

Dependent Files
   make supports dependencies on files in directories other than the current
   directory. This is best illustrated by the following example:
   Suppose the current directory is / srcl and that the program is being built
   from source there and in the / s rc2 directory. The makefile line would look
   like this:
      program: /src/main.o /src2/sub.o
         In -0 program /srcl/main.o /src2/sub.o -Ic
   This builds main. 0 and sub. 0 from their sources, putting the object files
   (the .o's) in the same directory as the sources. The .0 file will always be
   placed in the same directory as the source file.
                                  Make



 Note: Unfortunately, there is no way to say "all my .o's are in one directory
 and all my .c's are in another."
 Any further references to these files should be with the same path or else
 make will be confused.
 For object files to be dependent on files in another directory, the full
 pathname must be used as in:
    /src2/sub.o:/header/defs.h
 There are a few conventions that you must be aware of when naming your
 files. These are as follows:

    • If the filename contains a colon (for example, because the
      filename defines the volume on which the file is located), the
      colon must be followed by characters other than spaces or tabs,
      so that make can distinguish between this use of the colon char-
      acter and its use as a separator between the target and depend-
      ent files in a dependency line. This should not be a problem,
      since most systems do not allow filenames to contain spaces or
      tabs.

    • All references to a file must use the same name. For example, if a
      file is referred to in one place using the name

           /root/src/foo.c
    then all references to the file must use this exact same name. The name

           .. /src/foo.c
    would not match.


MACROS
 make has a simple macro capability that allows character strings to be
 associated with a macro name and to be represented in the make file by the
 name. The following paragraphs describe how to use macros within a
 makefile, then how they are defined, and finally some special features of
 macros.
                                Aztec C Unitools



Using Macros
   Within a make file, a macro is invoked by preceding its name with a dollar
   sign; macro names longer than one character must be parenthesized. For
   example, the following are valid macro invocations:
      $ (CFLAGS)
      $2
      $ (X)
      $X
   The last two invocations are identical.
   When make encounters a macro invocation in a dependency line or com-
   mand line of a rnakefile, it replaces it with ~he character string associated
   with the macro. For example, suppose that the macro OBJECTS is as-
   sociated with the string a . 0 b . 0 C • 0 d. 0 Then the dependency entries:
      prog: prog.o a.o b.o c.o d.o
         In prog.o a.o b.o c.o d.o
      a.o b.o c.o d.o: defs.h
   within a makefile could be abbreviated as:
      prog: prog.o $(OBJECTS)
         In prog.o $(OBJECTS)
      $ (OBJECTS) : defs.h


Defining Macros In a makeflle
   A macro is defined in a makefile by a line consisting of the macro name,
   followed by the character =, followed by the character string to be as-
   sociated with the macro.
   For example, the macro OBJECTS, used above, could be defined in the
   makefile by the line
      OBJECTS     = a.o b.o c.o d.o
   A makefile can contain any number of macro definition entries. A macro
   definition must appear in the makefile before the lines in which it is used.
                                     Make



Defining Macros in a Command Line
   A macro can be defined in the command line that starts make. The syntax
   for a command line definition has the following form:
      make MACRO=text
   For example, the following command assigns the value -DFLOAT to the
   macro CFLAGS:
      make CFLAGS=-DFLOAT
   Another example would be as follows:
      make MACRO=text
   Note that the equal sign (=) is the key to having it be a macro definition. If
   the macro is to be empty, enter:
      make MACRO=
   Command line macro definition always overrides makefile macro defini-
   tion. Be careful about your macro definitions if you are using make on
   systems other than the Amiga. Some operating systems do not support
   quotes around text, so any white space in the macro text causes the macro
   definition to terminate prematurely.

Macros Used by Built-In Rules
   make has two macros, CFLAGS and AFLAGS, that are used by the built-in
   rules. These macros by default are assigned the null string. This can be
   overridden by a macro definition entry in the makefile.
   For example, the following would cause CFLAGS to be assigned the string
   -T:
      CFLAGS = -T
   These macros are discussed below in the description of built-in rules.

Special macros
   There are three special macros: $$, $*, and $@. $$ represents the dollar sign.
   The other two are discussed below.
                                 Aztec C Unitools



   Before issuing any command, two special macros are set: $@ is assigned the
   full name of the target file to be made, and $* is the name of the target file,
   without its extension. Unlike other macros, these can only be used in
   command lines, not in dependency lines.
   For example, suppose that the files x. e,y. e I and z . e need to be com-
   piled using the option -DFLOAT. The following dependency entry could be
   used:
        x.O y.o z.o:
           ee -DFLOAT $*.e
   When make decides that x. 0 needs to be recreated from x. e it will assign
                                                                   I

   $* to the string x, and the command
        ee -DFLOAT x.e
   will be executed. Similarly, when y. 0 or z .0 is made, the command
        ee -DFLOAT y.e
   or
        ee -DFLOAT z.e
   will be executed.
   The special macros can also be used in command lines associated with rules.
   In fact, the $@ macro is primarily used by rules. We will discuss this more
   in the Rules section that follows.

RULES
   Earlier we presented the basic features of rules: what they are and how they
   are used. We noted that rules could be defined in a makefile and that some
   rules are built into make. In the following paragraphs, we describe how
   rules are defined in a makefile and list the built-in rules.

Rule Definition
   A rule consists of a source extension, target extension, and command list.
   In a makefile, an entry defining a rule consists of a line defining the two
   extensions, followed by lines containing the commands.
                                   Make


The line defining the extensions consists of the source extension, immedi-
ately followed by the target extension, followed by a colon.
All command lines associated with a rule must begin with a tab or space
character. The first line following the extension line that does not begin with
a tab or space terminates the commands for the rule.
For example, the following rule defines how to create a file having extension
. rel from one having extension. c:
    .c.rel:
      cc -0 $@ $*.c
The first line declares that the rule's source and target extension are. c and
. rel, respectively.
The second line, which must begin with a tab, is the command to be
executed when a . rel file is to be created using the rule.
Note the existence of the special macros $@ and $* in the command line.
Before the command is executed to create a . rel target file using the rule,
the macro $@ is replaced by the full name of the target file, and the macro
$* by the name of the target, less its extension.
Thus, if make decides that the file x . rel needs to be created using this rule,
it will issue the command
   cc   -0   x.rel x.c
If a rule defined in a makefile has the same source and target extensions as
a built-in rule, the commands associated with the makefile version of the
rule replace those of the built-in version. For example, the built-in rule for
creating a .0 file from a . c file looks like this:
    .c.o:
      cc $(CFLAGS)        -0   $@ $*.c
If you want the rule to generate an assembly language listing, include the
following rule in your makefile:
    .c.o:
      cc $(CFLAGS) -a $*.c
      as -ZAP -1 -0 $@ $*.asm
                                  Aztec C Unitools



Built-in Rules
   The following rules are built into make. The order of the rules is important,
   since make searches the list beginning with the first one, and applies the
   first applicable rule that it finds .
       . c.O:
           cc $(CFLAGS)      -0   $@ $*.c
       .asm.o:
           as $(AFLAGS)      -0   $@ $*.asm.
   Thus, if both a . asm and a . c file exist with the same basic name, the . c
   file would be used and not the . asm file
    The two macros CFLAGS and AFLAGS that are used in the built-in rules
    are built into make, having the null character string as their values. To have
    make use other options when applying one of the built-in rules, you can
    define the macro in the makefile.
    For example, if you want the options -t and -DDEBUG to be used when
    make applies the.c to.o rule, you can include the line
       CFLAGS = -T -DDEBUG
    in the make file. Another way to accomplish the same result is to redefine
    the .c to .0 rule in the makefile; this, however, would use more lines in the
    makefile than the macro redefinition.

COMMANDS
    In this section we want to discuss the execution of operating system
    commands by make.

Allowed Commands
   A command line in a dependency entry or rule within a makefile can specify
   any command that you can enter at the keyboard.
   This includes batch commands, commands built into the operating system,
   and commands that cause a program to be loaded and executed from a disk
   file.
                                    Make


Logging Commands and Aborting make
   Normally, before make executes a command, it writes the command to its
   standard output device; and when the command terminates, make halts if
   the command's return code was non-zero. Either or both of these actions
   can be suppressed for a command, by preceding the command in the
   makefile with a special character:
      @             Tells make not to log the command;

                    Tells make to ignore the command's return code.


   For example, consider the following dependency entry in a makefile:
      prog: a.o b.o c.O d.o
         ln -0 prog a.o b.o c.O d.o -lc
      @echo "All done!"
   when the echo command is executed, the command itself will not be logged
   to the console.

Long Command Lines
   Makefile commands that start a Manx program, such as ee, as, or In, or that
   start a program created with ee, as, In, and c.lib, can specify a command
   line containing up to 2048 characters.
   For example, if a program depends on fifty modules, you could associate
   them with the macro OBJECTS in the makefile, and also include the
   dependency entry
      prog: $ (OBJECTS)
         ln -0 prog $(OBJECTS) -lc
   This will result in a very long command line being passed to In.
   For the execution of other commands, the command line can contain at
   most 127 characters.

Makefile Syntax
   This section has already presented most of the syntax of a makefile; that is,
   how to define rules, macros, and dependencies. However, we must discuss
                             Aztec C Unitools



two features of a makefile syntax not presented elsewhere: comments and
line continuation.

Comments
make assumes that any line in a makefile whose first character is '#' is a
comment, and ignores it. For example:
   #
   # the following rule generates
   # an 8080 object module
   # from a C source file:
   #
   .c.080:
      cc80 -0 cc.tmp $*.c
      as80 -ZAP -0 $*.080 cc.tmp


Line Continuation
Many of the items in a makefile must be on a single line: A macro definition,
the file dependency information in a dependency entry, and a command
that make is to execute must each be on a single line.
You can tell make that several makefile lines should be considered to be a
single line by terminating each of the lines, except the last, with the
backslash character, '\'. When make sees this, it replaces the current line's
backslash and newline, and the next line's leading blanks and tabs by a
single blank, thus effectively joining the lines together.
The maximum length of a makefile line after joining continued lines is 2048
characters.
For example, the following macro definition equates OBJ to a string con-
sisting of all the specified object module names.
   OBJ = printf.o fprintf.o format.o\
   scanf.o fscanf.o scan.o\
   getchar.o getc.o
                                      Make


   As another example, the following dependency entry defines the depend-
   ence of driver .lib on several object modules, and specifies the com-
   mand for making driver . lib:
      driver. lib: driver.o printer.o \
           in.o \33
           out.o
        lib -0 driver.lib driver.o
           printer.o \
           in.o out.o
   This second example could have been more cleanly expressed using a
   macro:
      DRIVOBJ= driver.o printer.o\
           in.o out.o
      driver. lib: $(DRIVOBJ)
        lib -0 driver.lib $(DRIVOBJ)
   This was done to show that dependency lines and command lines can be
   continued, too.

Starting make
   We have already discussed how make is told to make a single file. Entering
      make filename
   makes the file named filename, which must be described by a depend-
   ency entry in the makefile. And entering
      make
   makes the first file listed as a target file in the first dependency entry in the
   makefile.
   In both of these cases, make assumes the makefile is named makef i Ie and
   that it is in the current directory on the default drive.
   In this section we want to describe the other features available when
   starting make.
                                 Aztec C Unitools



The Command Line
   The complete syntax of the command line that starts make is:
      make [-n] [-f makefile] [-a] [macro=str] [filel] [file2] •••
   Square brackets indicate that the enclosed parameter is optional.
   The parameters filel, file2 ... are the names of the files to be made. Each file
   must be described in a dependency entry in the makefile. They are made
   in the order listed on the command line.
   The other command line parameters are options and can be entered in
   upper- or lowercase. Their meanings are:


      -n                Suppresses command execution. make logs the com-
                        mands it would execute to its standard output
                        device, but does not execute them.

      -f makefile       The name of the makefile is makefile.

      -a                Forces make to make all files upon which the
                        specified target files directly or indirectly depend,
                        and to make the target files, even those that it con-
                        siders current.

      MACRO=str         Creates a macro named MACRO, and assigns str as
                        its value.

make's Standard Output
   make only uses its standard output device for printing error messages and
   for logging commands. You can redirect make's standard output device in
   the normal way.
   The standard input and output devices of a program started by make
   inherit the standard input and output of the make program, unless the
   command that started the program explicitly redirected one or both of
   them.
                                   Make



Differences between the Manx and UNIX make Programs
   The Manx make supports a subset of the features of the UNIX make. The
   following comments present features of the UNIX make that are not sup-
   ported by the Manx make.

      • The UNIX make will let you make a file that is not defined as a
        target in a makefile dependency entry, so long as a rule can be
        applied to create it. The Manx make does not allow this. For ex-
        ample, if you want to create the file hello. 0 from the file
        hello. c you could say, on UNIX

            make hell.o.o
      even if hello. 0 was not defined to be a target in a make file depend-
      encyentry. With the Manx make, you would have to have a dependency
      entry in a makefile that defines hello. 0 as a target.

      • The UNIX make supports the following options, which are not
        supported by the Manx make:

            p,   i, k, s, r, b, e, m, t, d,    q

      • The Manx make supports the option -a, which is not supported
        by the UNIX make.

      • The special names DEFAULT, .PRECIOUS, .sILENT, and .IG-
        NORE are supported only by the UNIX make.

      • Only the UNIX make allows the makefile to be read from
        make's standard input.

      • Only the UNIX make supports the special macros $? and $% and
        allows an uppercase 0 or F to be appended to the special
        macros, which thus modifies the meaning of the macro.

      • Only the UNIX make requires that the suffixes for additional
        rules be defined in a .sUFFIXES statement.

      • Only the UNIX make allows a target to depend on a member of
        a library or archive.
                              Aztec C Unitools



Examples
  This example shows a makefile for making several programs. Note the
  entry for arc. This does not result in the generation of a file called arc;
  it is only used so that arcv and mkarcv can be generated by entering
  make arc.
     #
     # rules:
     #
     .c.oSO:
        ccSO -DTINY -0 $@ $*.c
     #
     # macros:
     #
     OBJ=make.o parse.o scandir.o \
     dumptree.o ru1es.o command.o
     #
     # dependency entry for making make:
     make: $ (OBJ)
       In -0 make $(OBJ) -lc
     # dependency entries for making arcv & mkarcv:
     #
     arc: mkarcv arcv
     mkarcv: mkarcv.o
        In -0 mkarcv mkarcv.o -lc
     arcv: arcv.o
        In -0 arcv arcv.o -lc
     #
     # dependency entries for making
     # CP/M-SO versions of arcv & mkarcv:
     #
     mkarcvSO.com: mkarcv.oSO
        InSO -0 mkarcvSO.com mkarcv.oSO -It -lc
     arcvSO.com: arcv.oSO
        1nSO -0 arcvSO.com arcv.oSO -It -lc
     $ (OBJ) : 1ibc.h make file
                                     Make



    The next example uses make to make a library, my. lib. Three directories
    are involved: the directory libe and two of its subdirectories, sys and
    mise. The C and assembly language source files are in the two subdirec-
    tories. There are makefiles named makefile in each of the three directories,
    and this example makes use of all of them. With the current directory being
    libe, you enter
       make my.lib
    This starts make, which reads the makefile in the libe directory. make
    will change the current directory to sys and then start another make
    program.
    This second make compiles and assembles all the source files in the sys
    directory, using the makefile that is in the sys directory.
    When the sys make finishes, the libe make regains control, and then
    starts yet another make, which compiles and assembles all the source files
    in the mise subdirectory, using the makefile that is in the mise directory.
   When the mise make is done, the libe make regains control and builds
   my . lib. You can then remove the object files in the subdirectories by
    entering
       make elean
    The following files contain the makefiles for this example:


The makefJle In the 'Jlbc' Directory
       my.lib: sys.mk mise.mk
         rm my. lib
         libutil -0 my. lib -£ my.bld
                               Aztec C Unitools



       sys.mk:
          cd sys
          make
          cd ..
       misc.mk:
          cd misc
          make
          cd ..
       clean:
          cd sys
          make clean
          cd ..
          cd misc
          make clean
          cd ..


Makefile for the 'sys' Directory
       REL=asctime.o bdos.o begin.o chmod.o \
         croot.o csread.o ctime.o \
       dostime.o dup.o exec.o execl.o execlp.o \
         execv.o execvp.o \
       fexec.o fexecl.o fexecv.o ftime.o \
         getcwd.o getenv.o \
       isatty.o localtLm.o mkdir.o open.o stat.o \
         system.o time.o\
         utime.o wait.o dioctl.o ttyio.o access.o
         syserr.o \
                                    Make



       COPT=
       HEADER= .. /header
       .c.o:
           cc $(COPT) -I$(HEADER) $*.C -0 $@
           sqz $@
       .asm.o:
           as $*.asm -o$@
           sqz $@
       al.l.: $ (REL)
       cl.ean:
           rm *.0



Makeflle for the 'mlsc' Directory
       REL= atoi.o atol..o cal.l.oc.o ctype.o format.o \
          mal.l.oc.o \
          qsort.o sprintf.o sscanf.o fformat.o fscan.o
       COPT=
       HEADER= .. /header
       .c.o:
           cc $(COPT) -I$(HEADER) $*.c -0 $@
           sqz $@
       .asm.o:
           as $*.asm -0 $@
           sqz $@
       al.l.: $ (REL)
       fformat.o: format.c
           cc -I$(HEADER) -DFLOAT format.c -0 fformat.o
       fscan.o: scan.c
           cc -I$(HEADER) -DFLOAT scan.c -0 fscan.o
       cl.ean:
           rm *.0
                   Z EDITOR


Chapter 5 - Z Editor
  Z is a text editor for creating source programs, usually in the C program-
  ming language. Z has the following features:

     • Similarity to the UNIX editor Vi: If you know Vi, you know Z.

     • Full-screen editor: The screen acts as a window into the file
       being edited.

     • A wealth of commands, specified with only a few keystrokes,
       that allow you to edit quickly and efficiently. The simple and
       natural way of entering commands and the mnemonic assign-
       ment of commands to keys make the commands easy to remem-
       berand use.

     • An interface to the Manx QuikFix facility. QuikFix launches the
       editor directly from the compiler, loads the source file, positions
       to the first statement in error, and displays the error message.
       You can then correct the error and automatically go to the next
       error. After you correct the errors, you enter, :wq, the changes are
       saved, and the compiler is re-Iaunched. If necessary, the process
       repeats. QuikFix cuts out administrative time and eliminates the
       bother of matching up error messages and source lines. There
       is no fumbling around, there are no annoying distractions. Quik-
       Fix orchestrates the motions and lets you focus on the solutions.

     • Commands for the following:
                               Aztec C UniTools



         D   Bringing different sections of a file into view
         D   Inserting text
         D   Making changes to text
         D Rearranging text by moving blocks of text around and by insert-
             ing text from other files
         D   Accessing files
         D Searching for character strings and "regular expressions"

      • Several commands that are useful for editing C programs, includ-
        ing commands for finding matching parentheses, square brack-
        ets, and curly braces; for finding the beginning of the next or
        preceding function; and for finding the next or preceding blank
        line.

      • Most commands can be easily executed repeatedly.

      • Sequences of commands, called macros, can be defined and ex-
        ecuted one or more times.

      • Changes are made to an in-memory copy of a file; the file itself is
        not changed until a command is explicitly given.

      • Editing feature that allows the operator to request that a file con-
        taining a certain function be edited-Z finds the file and
        prepares it for editing.

Requirements
   The maximum file size that you may edit using Z must not exceed your
   system's total memory size, minus 64K. In other words, to use Z editor, you
   must have at least 64K of available memory above and beyond the file you
   want to edit.
   As you begin editing, Z will initially allocate a 16K edit buffer; Z will
   allocate additional 16K buffers when necessary.
                Z Editor



Components
  The Z package contains two programs:

      • Z - the text editor

      • ctags, - a utility for creating a file that relates tags to copies of C
        source files


Getting Started
  Z is a very powerful tool for creating and editing C source programs, but
  its wealth of commands and options can be overwhelming to someone not
  familiar with it. This chapter gets you using Z as quickly as possible by
  presenting a small subset of the Z commands with which you can create
  and edit programs. Then, with the ability to create and edit programs, you
  can continue reading the rest of this chapter at your leisure to learn about
  the other features and commands of Z.
   The first part of this chapter describes how to create a new C program, and
   the second part, how to edi t an existing program.


CREATING A NEW PROGRAM
   You start Z by entering:
      z hello.c
   where hello. c represents the file to be edited. Since we are creating a new
   program, the file does not yet exist, therefore, Z displays a message on its
   status line (which may be either the first or last line of the display, depend-
   ing on the system on which Z is running). On systems that use the first
   display line for status information, the screen looks like this:

      "hello.c" No such file or directory

   with the cursor on the left-hand column of the second line. On systems that
   use the last display line for status information, the screen looks like this:


      "hello.c" No such file or directory
                               Aztec C UniTools



   with the cursor on the left-hand column of the first line.
   Z is now waiting for you to enter a command.

The Screen
   As mentioned above, Z uses the one line of the display for displaying
   information and for echoing the characters of some commands that are
   entered.
   The rest of the lines on the screen display the text of the file being edited.
   The tilde characters on the screen lines tell you that Z has reached the
   end-of-file. These characters are not actually in the file.

Modes ofZ
   Z has two modes: command and insert, that allow you to enter commands
   and to insert text, respectively.

   Insert Mode
   With Z in insert mode, characters that you type are entered into a memory-
   resident buffer; the characters do not appear in the file until you exit insert
   mode and explicitly issue a command that causes Z to write the buffer to
   the file.
   Z has several commands for entering insert mode; the one we want to use,
   i, allows text to be entered before the cursor. Type i. Notice that Z does not
   echo this command on the screen; it only does that for a few commands.
   Notice also that you are in insert mode, as evidenced by the message
      <INSERT>
   on the right-hand side of the status line.
   You may now enter a program, just as you would on a typewriter. Notice
   that the cursor is positioned where the next character will be entered. Enter
   the "hello world" program:
      main ()
       (
      printf(nhello, world\nn);
       }
               Z Editor


   When you press the <CR> key after entering the printf line, the cursor
   was left positioned on the next line of the screen underneath the first
   nonwhite space character of the preceding line. This feature, "autoindent,"
   is useful when creating C programs, encouraging statements within a
   compound statement to be indented and lined up. Autoindent can be
   disabled and enabled, and we will show you how later.
   We want the closing curly brace of the main function to be on the first
   column of the line, not indented. So after you type the semicolon and then
   return at the end of the printf line, type the backspace key to get back to
   the first column, and then type the "}" key.
   The backspace key can also be used to backspace over characters that you
   incorrectly type.
   During insert mode, if you hold down the control key and type a W, the
   previous word typed is deleted.
   When you have finished inserting the program, hit the escape key to exit
   insert mode and return to command mode. The key used as the escape key
   varies from system to system.

Exiting Z
   To write the program you have just entered from the text buffer to the disk
   file hello. c and then exit Z, type ZZ. (Note that the "ZZ" must be typed
   as uppercase; the entry "zz" will not work.)
   Occasionally you may want to exit Z without writing the text you have
   entered to a file; in this case, you would type
       :q!
   followed by a carriage return <CR>.

EDITING AN EXISTING FILE
   The following describes the commands you need to make changes to an
   existing file.
                                Aztec C UniTools



Starting and Stopping Z
   You get in and out of Z when editing an existing file just as you do when
   creating a new file. To start Z, enter
     z hello.c
   where hello. c is the name of the file to be edited.
   Z reads the specified file into the text buffer, displays the first screen of file
   text, displays the file's statistics (name, number of lines, number of charac-
   ters) on the status line, positions the cursor at the first character of the first
   line, and enters command mode, waiting for you to enter a command.
   To stop Z and save the changes you have made, put Z in command mode
   and enter:
      ZZ

   (Again, note that the "ZZ" must be typed as uppercase; the entry "zz" will
   not work.) Z knows if you made changes to the original text or not; if you
   did, Z saves the original file by changing the extension of its name to .bak
   and then writes the modified text to a new file having the specified name.
   If a .bak file with that name already exists it will be deleted before the rename
   occurs.
   If you did not make any changes, the ZZ command causes Z to halt wi thou t
   changing any disk files.
   The command :q! QUITS Z without writing anything to the file being
   edited.

Command Line Options
   With Aztec eversion 5, z supports the two following options to be used
   in conjunction with QuikFix.
      -e         The option -e when z is invoked causes z to parse the
                 AztecC.Err file generated by the compiler. z reads the
                 first line of the file and determines the name of the file in
                 which the errors occurred. It then reads and stores all
                 the errors associated with the file up to 25 errors. Addi-
                 tional errors for this file are left in the AztecC.Err file for
                 later parsing. The lines read are removed from the file. If
                 all are read, the file is removed. z then reads the target
                 Z Editor



                 source file and positions the cursor on the correct line
                 and column and displays the appropriate error or warn-
                 ing message.

      -0         The option -0 causes z when run in the background to
                 open a window at the specified position with the
                 spccified size and title. This string is appended to the
                 "RAW:" which is used to open the window and follows
                 the standard Amiga conventions for console windows.

The Cursor
   Before describing the commands for viewing and changing the text in Z's
   memory-resident buffer, we need to discuss the cursor.
   In Z, the character position in the text that is pointed to by the cursor acts
   as a reference point: Most commands perform an action relative to that
   position. For example, the i command, described in the last section, allows
   you to enter text before the cursor. And the x command, to be discussed,
   deletes the character at which the cursor is located.
   Therefore, we describe two types of commands in this chapter: those that
   move the cursor around in the text, thus bringing different sections of text
   into view, and those that modify text in the vicinity of the cursor.

Moving Around In the Text: Scrolling
   The text you created for the "hello, world" program easily fit on a single
   screen. But most text files are too large to be viewed all at once, so we need
   commands to bring different sections into view.
   Two such commands are the "scroll" commands: "scroll down," represented
   by the character Control-D, and "scroll up," represented bY Control-V. That
   is, to execute the "scroll down" command, you hold down the control key
   and then press the 0 key. The rest of this manual refers to control characters
   using notation of the form" 0 rather than Control-D, for brevity. Thus, the
   scroll up and scroll down commands are represented as "U and "0,
   respectively.
   A scroll command moves the screen up or down in the file, bringing another
   half-screen of text into view. It is as if the text were on a reel of tape and the
                                Aztec C UniTools



   screen is a viewer: Scrolling down moves the viewer down the reel, and
   scrolling up moves the viewer up the reel.
   When scrolling, the cursor will be left on the same position within the text
   after the scroll as before, if that position is still within view. Otherwise, the
   cursor is moved to a line in the text which was newly brought into view.

Moving Around In the Text: the Go Command
   Scrolling is one way to move around in the text, but it is slow. If we have a
   large text file to which we want to append text, it would take a long time
   and many scroll commands to reach the end.
   The go command, g, is one way to move rapidly to the point of interest in
   the text: Entering g by itself will move the cursor to the end of the text and,
   if necessary, redraw the screen with the text which precedes it.
   The g command can also be preceded by the number of the line of interest;
   the cursor will move to the beginning of that line. So to move back to the
   first line of text, enter:
      19
   The g command can be used to move to any line within the text, but since
   you usually do not know the numbers of the lines, the g command is mainly
   used to move to the beginning and end of the text.

Moving Around In the Text: String Searching
   So, scrolling allows us to take a casual stroll through text, and the g
   command to move rapidly to the beginning and end of the file. What we
   need is a command to rapidly move to a specific point in the middle of the
   text.
   The string search command, I, is such a command. When you enter I,
   followed by the string of interest, followed by a carriage return, Z searches
   forward in the text from the cursor position, looking for the string. If Z
   reaches the end of the text without finding the string, it will wrap around
   and continue searching from the beginning of the text.
   If the string is found, the cursor is positioned at its first character and, if
   necessary, the screen is redrawn with its surrounding text.
                Z Editor


   If the string is not found, a message saying so is displayed on the status line
   of the screen and the cursor is not moved.
   While the string search command and its string are being entered, the
   characters are displayed on the status line, and normal editing operations
   can be used, such as backspacing over mistyped characters.
   Z remembers the last string searched for. To repeat the search, enter the find
   next string command, n.

Finely Tuned Moves
   With the commands presented up to now, you can move to the area of
   interest in the text. The next few paragraphs present commands that move
   the cursor from somewhere within the area of interest to a specific character
   position from which changes will be made.
   Some commands for this, from the many available in Z, are:
                           Moves the cursor up one line, to the first non-
                           whitespace character on the line.
   CR (carriage return)    Moves the cursor down one line, to the first non-
                           whitespace character on the line.
      space                Moves the cursor right on the line on which the
                           cursor is located.
      backspace            Moves the cursor left on the line on which the cur-
                           sor is located.
   These commands can be preceded by a number, which cause the command
   to be performed the specified number of times. For example,
      3-                   Moves the cursor up three lines.
      S<space>             Moves the cursor right five characters. Note that
                           <space> represents the space bar.

Deleting Text
   You now have a repertoire of commands that allows you to move the cursor
   fairly quickly to any location in a text file. We are ready to move on to a few
   commands for modifying the text.
                               Aztec C UniTools



  Two such commands for deleting text are DELETE CHARACTER, x, and
  DELETE LINE, dd:

      x     Deletes the character under the cursor.

      dd    Deletes the entire line on which the cursor is located.

   Each of these commands can be preceded by a number, causing the com-
   mand to be repeated the specified number of times. For example,
      2x    Deletes two characters.

      3dd    Deletes three lines.

More Insert Commands
   You already know one command for inserting text: i, which allows text to
   be inserted before the cursor. We need a few more insert commands:
      a      Enters insert mode such that text is inserted following the
             cursor.

      o      (Lowercase 0) Creates a blank line below the current line
             (Le., the line on which the cursor is located), moves the
             cursor to the new line, and enters insert mode.

      o      (Uppercase 0) Same as 0, but the new line is above the cur-
             rent line.

Summary
   With the set of commands presented in this chapter, you can edit any text
   file. You should continue reading this chapter to learn more about Z, while
   you use the basic command set for performing your editing chores.
   You will find that Z has many more capabilities that allow you to perform
   functions more quickly and with fewer keystrokes than with the basic
   command set, and that allow you to perform functions that you cannot
   perform with the basic command set.
                 Z Editor



More Commands
   This section describes the rest of the features and commands of Z, building
   and expanding on the information presented in the previous section.


THE SCREEN
   We have already discussed the basic details on Z's use of the screen. Some
   of the more complex details concerning Z's use of the screen are addressed
   below.

Displaying Unprintable Characters
   A file edited by Z can contain any character whose ASCII value in decimal
   is less than 128, including unprintable characters, such as SOH (start of
   heading), LF (line feed), and ESC (escape). Z displays unprintable charac-
   ters as two characters; the first is ", and the second is the character whose
   ASCII value equals that of the character itself plus Ox40. For example, the
   unprintable character SOH is displayed as the pair of characters "A, since
   the ASCII value of SOH is 1, and 1 plus Ox40 is Ox41, which is the ASCII
   value for the character "A".

Displaying Lines That Do Not Fit on the Screen
   We have already stated that lines beyond the end of the file are displayed
   with the character - in the first column of the line on the screen. When you
   see the - character in the leftmost column of a line on the screen, this usually
   signifies that this line of the display does not contain a line of text. But lines
   that do not fit on the screen are displayed by Z in a similar manner.
   Z allows lines to be entered that are longer than a screen line. Normally, Z
   simply displays such lines on several screen lines. In some cases, however,
   the entire line will not fit on the screen. For example, if the cursor is
   positioned at the beginning of the file, it may not be possible to display the
   text of an overly-large line at the bottom of the screen. In this case, Z
   displays an @ character in the first column of the screen lines on which the
   text would be displayed.
   Thus, when you see the @ character in the leftmost column of a line on the
   screen, this signifies that the text that would have appeared on this line of
   the screen was too big, and not that the @ character is in the text.
                               Aztec C UniTools



Commands
   When most commands are entered, Z does not echo the characters on the
   screen. However, two commands for which Z does display the characters
   on the screen are (1) those commands whose first character begins with ":"
   and (2) the string search commands.
   For these commands, the characters are displayed on the screen status line,
   and can be backspaced over and reentered, if necessary. Also, Z does not
   act on such commands until you type the carriage return key, CR.

Special Keys
   There are two keys that have special meaning for Z: the escape key, which
   is used to exit insert mode, and the control key, which is used in conjunction
   with another key to generate control characters. The actual keys used for
   these functions vary from system to system.

PAGING AND SCROLLING
   Previously, we described commands for scrolling through text, "U and" D.
   Another pair of commands allow you to page, instead of scroll, through
   text. The commands are "D and "F, which page backwards and forwards,
   respectively.
   A page command brings the previous or next screen of text into view by
   redrawing the screen with the new text. Whereas scrolling was described
   as a viewer moving over a reel of tape, paging can be described as turning
   the pages of a book.
   Paging moves you through text more quickly than scrolling does. However,
   since paging redraws the screen all at once, while scrolling changes it
   gradually, it is often more difficult to keep a sense of continuity when
   paging than when scrolling. As an aid to continuity when paging, two lines
   of text which were previously in view are still in view after paging.
   Scroll commands can be preceded by a value specifying the number of lines
   to be scrolled up or down. If a number is not specified, the last scroll value
   entered is used; if a scroll value was never entered, it defaults to half a
   screen's worth of lines. Separate values are maintained for scrolling up and
   for scrolling down.
                 Z Editor



   The scrolling and paging commands necessarily move the cursor within
   the text but they cannot be used to home the cursor to an exact position at
   which changes are to be made. For this, you will have to use commands
   described in subsequent sections.

SEARCHING FOR STRINGS
   As stated, Z uses the I string search command to scan forward looking for
   a string. This section discusses additional searching capabilities that Z
   provides, the capability of Z to match patterns called REGULAR EXPRES-
   SIONS, and special characters that are used to match a class of characters.


Additional String-Searching Commands
   The other string-searching commands are:
      ?                Similar to I, but Z searches backwards, rather than
                       forward, to find the previous occurrence of the string.

      n                Repeats the last string-search command.

      N                Repeats the last string-search command, but in the
                       opposite direction.

      :se ws=O         Turns the wrap scan option off.

      :se ws=l         Turns the wrap scan option on.

   When Z reaches the end or beginning of text without finding the string of
   interest, it normally wraps around to the opposite end of the text and
   continues the search. It does this because by default the wrap scan option
   is on. This option can be disabled by entering the set option command:
      :se ws=O
   thus causing the search to end when it reaches the end of text. The option
   can be reenabled by entering:
      :se ws=l
   Note that for this colon command, as for all colon commands, carriage
   return must be typed before the command is executed.
                                Aztec C UniTools



Regular Expressions
   The strings you tell Z to search for are actually regular expressions, similar
   to the expressions or "patterns" that are used by the grep utility when
   matching strings. A regular expression is a pattern that is matched to
   character strings. The pattern can define a specific sequence of characters
   that make up the string; in this case, only that specific string matches the
   pattern. The pattern can also contain special characters that match a class
   of characters; in this case, the pattern can match any of a number of
   character strings.
   For example, one such special construct is square brackets surrounding a
   character string; this matches any character in the enclosed string. So the
   regular expression
      ab[xyz]cd
   matches the strings
      abxcd
      abycd
      abzcd
   Another special character is *, which matches any number of occurrences
   of the preceding pattern. For example, the regular expression
      ab*c
   matches many strings, including
      abc
      abbe
      abxyzc
   and so on. And the pattern
      ab[xyz]*ed
   matches many strings, including:
      abed
      abxed
      abxyed
      abzzxed
                  Z Editor



   and soon.
   The complete list of special characters and constructs that can be included
   in regular expressions is:
      1\          Matches the beginning of the line when it is the first
                  character of a pattern.

      $           Matches the end of the line when it is the last character
                  ofa pattern.

                  Matches any single character.

      <           Matches the beginning of a word.

      >           Matches the end of a word.

      [str]       Matches any single character in the enclosed string.

                  Matches any single character not in the enclosed string.

      [x-y]       Matches any character between x and y.
      ,.          Matches any number of occurrences of the preceding
                  pattern.

Enabling Extended Pattern Matching
   With Z, you can toggle the extent of pattern matching which will be done
   by Z. To have full pattern matching, type
      :se rna=1

   If you do not want full pattern matching, type
      :se rna=Q

   which will only allow you to use 1\ and $ in regular expressions.
   By default, extended pattern matching is disabled.
                               Aztec C UniTools



LOCAL MOVES
   This section presents more commands for moving the cursor fairly short
   distances: up or down a few lines, along the line on which it is located, and
   so on. Some commands to accomplish this that we have already discussed
   are the CR (carriage return), space, and backspace. The commands intro-
   duced here reflect the importance of finely tuned, quickly executed move-
   ments.

Moving Around on the Screen:
   Here are some commands for moving the cursor short distances:
      h      Moves to the left one character.

             Moves down one line, leaving the cursor in the same
             column.

      k      Moves up one line, leaving the cursor in the same column.

      1      Moves right one character.

   The keys AH, AJ, AK, and AL are synonyms for h,j,k, and 1, respectively.
   These commands can be preceded by a number that specifies the number
   of times the command is to be repeated.
   Z has commands for moving the cursor to the top, middle, and bottom of
   the screen; they are H, M, and L, respectively. The cursor is positioned at
   the beginning of the line to which it is moved.
   Remember the - command, which moved the cursor up a line, to the first
   nonwhitespace character? As you might expect, + moves the cursor down
   a line, to the first nonwhitespace character. + is thus equivalent to CR


Moving within a Line
   The following commands have been discussed previously:
      h, A H, backspace          Left one character.

      1, AL, space               Right one character.
                Z Editor



   The following are a few more commands that allow you to move around
   on the current line:

      "         Moves the cursor to the first nonwhitespace character on
                the line.

      o         Moves the cursor to the first character on the line.

      $         Moves the cursor to the last character on the line.

   Afew commands fetch another character from the keyboard, search for that
   character, beginning at the current cursor location, and leave the cursor near
   the character:
      f         Scan forward, looking for the character, and leave the
                cursor on it.

      t         Same as f, but leave the cursor on the character preced-
                ing the found character.

      F         Same as f, but scan backwards.

      T         Same as t, but scan backwards.

                Repeat the last f, t, F, or T command.

                Repeat the last f, t, F, or T command in the opposite
                direction.

   Finally, the command 1 moves the cursor to the column whose number
   precedes the command. For example, the following command moves the
   cursor to column 56 on the current line:
      561

Word Movements
   Z has several conunands for moving the cursor to the beginning or end of
   a word that is near the cursor:
      w             Moves to the beginning of the next word (alphanumeric
                    only).
                              Aztec C UniTools



      b            Moves to the beginning of the previous word      (al-
                   phanumeric only).

      e            Moves to the end of the current word (alphanumeric
                   only).

   For the preceding commands, a word is defined in the normal way: a string
   of alphabetical and numerical characters surrounded by whitespace or
   punctuation. There is a variant of each of these commands, differing only
   in the definition of a word: They think that a word is any string of
   nonwhitespace characters surrounded by whitespace. The variant of each
   of these commands is identified by the same letter, but in uppercase instead
   of lowercase:
      w             Moves to the beginning of the next word (any charac-
                    ters surrounded by whitespace).

      B            Moves to the beginning of the previous word (any char-
                   acters surrounded by whitespace).

      E            To the end of the current word (any characters sur-
                   rounded by whitespace).

   Each of these commands can be preceded by a number, specifying the
   number of times the command is to be repeated. For example,
      Sw            Moves forward five words.

   The word movement commands cross line boundaries, if necessary, to find
   the word they are looking for.

Moves within C Programs
   Z has several commands for moving the cursor within C programs:
      ]] and [[        Moves to the opening curly brace, {, of the next or
                       previous function, respectively.

      %                Moves to the parenthesis, square bracket, or curly
                       bracket that matches the one on which the cursor is
                       currently located.
                 Z Editor



      {and}             Moves to the preceding or next blank line.

   The [[ and]] commands assume that the opening and closing curly braces
   for a function are in the first column of a line, and that all other curly braces
   are indented.
   As an example of the % command, given the statement:
      whi1e «(a = getchar(»                != EOF)    &&   (c != ' a ' »

   with the cursor on the parenthesis immediately following the while, the %
   command will move the cursor to the last closing parenthesis on the line.

Marking and Returning
   Z has commands that allow you to set markers in the text and later return
   to a marker. Twenty-six markers are available, identified by the alphabetical
   letters.
   Unlike the other commands described in this section, these commands are
   not limited to moves within the current area of the cursor-they can move
   the cursor anywhere within the text.
   A marker is set at the current cursor location using the command
      mx

   where x is the letter with which you want to mark the location.
   There are two commands for returning to a marked position:
       'x        Moves the cursor to the location marked with the letter x

      'x         Moves the cursor to the first nonwhitespace character on
                 the line containing the x marker.

   Occasionally, you may accidently move the cursor far from the desired
   position. There are two single quote commands for returning you to the
   area from which you moved:
      1/
                 Returns the cursor to its exact starting point.

      "          Returns the cursor to the first nonwhitespace character
                 on the line from which the cursor was moved.
                               Aztec C UniTools



   For example, if the cursor is on the line:
      if (a    >= 'm' && a <= 'z')
   at the character <, then following a command which moves the cursor far
   away, the command \ \ will return the cursor to the < character, and the
   command' , will return it to the beginning of the word if.

Adjusting the Screen
   The Z command is used to redraw the screen, with a certain line at the top,
   middle, or bottom of the screen.
   To use it, place the cursor on the desired line, then enter the Z command,
   followed by one of these characters:
      CR         To place the line at the top of the screen.

                 To place it at the bottom.

                 To place it in the middle of the screen.

   The Z command is not a true cursor motion command, because the cursor
   is in the same position in the text after the command as before.
   Control- L repaints the screen.


MAKING CHANGES
   The previous section described the cursor movement commands. The next
   several sections describe commands for making changes to the text.

Small Changes
   This section describes several more small commands. The first two com-
   mands listed below were already discussed in a previous section.
      x          Which deletes the character at which the cursor is lo-
                 cated.

      dd         Which deletes the line at which the cursor is located.
               Z Editor



      X         Delete the character which precedes the cursor. Can be
                preceded by a count of the number of characters to be
                deleted.

      D         Delete the rest of the line, starting at the cursor position.

      rx        Replace the character at the cursor with x .

      R         Start overlaying characters, beginning at the cursor.
                Type the escape key to terminate the command.

      s         Delete the character at the cursor and enter insert mode.
                When preceded by a number, that number of characters
                is deleted before entering insert mode.

      S         Delete the line at the cursor and enter insert mode; when
                preceded by a count, that number of lines is deleted
                before entering insert mode.

      C         Delete the rest of the line, beginning at the cursor, and
                enter insert mode.

      J         Join the line on which the cursor is positioned with the
                following line.

Operators for Deleting and Changing Text
   Z has a small number of commands for modifying text. They all have the
   same form, consisting of a single letter command, optionally preceded by
   a count and always followed by a cursor motion command. The count
   specifies the number of times the command is to be executed. The command
   affects the text from the current cursor position to the destination of the
   cursor motion command, if the starting and ending position of the cursor
   are on the same line. If these positions are on different lines, the command
   affects all lines between and including the lines which contain the starting
   position and ending positions.
   In this section, we are going to describe the operators for deleting and
   changing text, d and c:
      d         Deletes text as defined by the cursor motion command.
                                Aztec C UniTools



      c           Same as d, but Z enters insert mode following the dele-
                  tion.

   For example,
      dw          Deletes text from the current cursor location to the begin-
                  ning of the next word.

      3dw         Deletes text from the cursor to the beginning of the third
                  word.

      d3w         Sameas3dw.

      db          Deletes text from the current to the beginning of the pre-
                  vious word.

      d 'a        Deletes text from the cursor to the marker a, if the
                  marker and the starting cursor position are on the same
                  line. Otherwise, deletes lines from that on which the cur-
                  sor is located through that on which the marker is lo-
                  cated.

      d/var       Deletes text either from the cursor to the string var or
                  between the lines at which the cursor is currently lo-
                  cated and that on which the string is located.

      d$          Deletes the rest of the characters on the line, and hence
                  is equivalent to D.

Deleting and Changing Lines
   Previously, we presented a command for deleting lines: dd. As you can see
   now, this is a special form of the d command, because the character
   following the first d is not a cursor motion command.
   For aU the operator commands, typing the command character twice will
   affect whole lines. Thus, typing cc will clear the line on which the cursor is
   located and enter insert mode. Preceding cc with a number will compress
   the specified number of lines to a single blank line and enter insert mode
   on that line.
                Z Editor



Moving Blocks of Text
   When text is deleted using the d or c command, it is moved to a buffer called
   the unnamed buffer. (There are other buffers available, which have names.
   More about them later).
   Data in the unnamed buffer can be copied into the main text buffer using
   one of the put commands:
      p         Copies the unnamed buffer into the main text buffer,
                after the cursor.

      P         Same as p, but the text is placed before the cursor.

   Thus, the delete and put commands together provide a convenient way to
   move blocks of text within a file.
   The contents of the unnamed buffer is very volatile: When any command
   is issued that modifies the text, the text which was modified is placed in the
   unnamed buffer. This is done so that the modification can be undone, if
   necessary, using one of the undo commands. For example, if you delete a
   character using the x command, the deleted character is placed in the
   unnamed buffer, replacing whatever was in there. The unnamed buffer
   only holds the contents of the last command executed. So you have to be
   careful when moving text via the unnamed buffer. If you delete text into
   the unnamed buffer, expecting to place it elsewhere, then issue another
   command which modifies the unnamed buffer before issuing the put
   command. The deleted text is no longer in the unnamed buffer.
   As you will see, the named buffers can also be used to move blocks of text,
   and their contents are not as volatile.

Duplicating Blocks of Text: the Yank Operator
   The yank operator, y, copies text into the unnamed buffer without first
   deleting it from the main text buffer. When used with the put command, it
   provides a convenient way for duplicating a block of text.
   The yoperator has the same form as the other operators: an optional count,
   followed by the y command, followed by a cursor motion command. The
   command yanks the text from the cursor position to the destination of the
   cursor motion command, if the starting and ending positions are on the
   same line. If they are on separate lines, a whole number of lines are yanked,
                                Aztec C UniTools



   from the cursor position through the point the cursor would be moved to
   by the cursor motion command. The text is yanked into the unnamed buffer.
   For example,
      yw          Copies text from the cursor to the next word into the un-
                  named buffer.

      y3w         Copies text from the cursor to the beginning of the third
                  word.

      3yw         Same as y3w.

      y 'a        Copies text from the cursor location to the marker a
                  into the unnamed buffer, if the two positions are on the
                  same line. Otherwise, copies entire lines between and in-
                  cluding those containing the two positions.

   As a special case, the command yy will yank a specified number of whole
   lines. The command Y is a synonym for yy. For example,
      yy          Yanks the line at the current cursor location.

      y3w         Yanks three lines, beginning with the one at the cursor
                  location.

Named Buffers
   In addition to the unnamed buffers, Z has 26 named buffersr each identified
   by a letter of the alphabetr which can be used for rearranging text. Text can
   be deleted or yanked into a named buffer and put from it back into the main
   text buffer.
   The advantage of these buffers over the unnamed buffer in rearranging text
   is that their contents are not volatile: When you put something in a named
   buffer, it stays there and will not be overwritten unexpectedly. Also, as you
   will seer the named buffers can be used to move text from one file to another.
   To yank text into a named buffer, use the yank operator, preceded by a
   double quote and the buffer name, and followed by a cursor motion
                Z Editor



   command. For example, the following will yank three words into the a
   buffer:
      "ay3w
   and the following yanks four lines into the b buffer, beginning with the line
   on which the cursor is located:
      "b4yy
   Text is deleted into a named buffer in the same way: The delete command
   is used, preceded by a double quote and the buffer name. For example, to
   delete characters from the cursor to the a marker into the h buffer:
      "hd 'a
   The preceding command, when the source and destination cursor positions
   are on separate lines, will delete a number of whole lines into the h buffer,
   from that on which the cursor is initially located through that containing
   the destination position.
   To delete ten lines into the c buffer:
      "clOdd
   Text in a named buffer is put back into the main text using the put
   commands p and P, preceded by a double quote and the buffer name. For
   example:
      "ap       puts text from the a buffer, after the cursor.

      "zp       puts text from the z buffer, before the cursor.

Moving Text between Files
   The named buffers are conveniently used to move text from one file to
   another. First yank or delete text from one file into a named buffer; then
   switch and begin editing the target file, using the :e command:
      :efilename
   (More on this later). Then move the cursor to the desired position and put
   text from the named buffer.
                                  Aztec C VniTools



Shifting Text
   The shift operators, < and> , which are used to shift text left and right a tab
   stop, respectively.
   For example,
       >/str
   shifts right one tab stop the lines from that on which the cursor is located
   through that containing the string str.
   Following the standard operator syntax, repeating the shift operator twice
   affects a number of whole lines:
       5«         Shifts five lines left.

       »          Shifts one line right.

Undoing and Redoing Changes
   Z remembers the last change you made, and has a command, u, which
   undoes it, restoring the text to its original state.
    Z also remembers all the changes which were made to the last line which
    was modified. Another UNDO command, V, undoes all changes made to
    that line.
    Finally, the period command, ..... , reexecutes the last command that
    modified text.


INSERTING TEXT
    The following commands have been discussed:
       a          Append after cursor.

                  Insert before cursor.

       o          Open new line below cursor.

       o          Open new line above cursor.

       C          Delete to end of line, then enter insert mode.
                Z Editor


      s         Delete characters, then enter insert mode.

      S         Delete lines, then enter insert mode.

   This section discusses the remaining commands for entering insert mode
   and describes some other features of insert mode.

Additional Insert Commands
   The other commands for entering insert mode are:
      A         Append characters at the end of the line on which the
                cursor is located. This is equivalent to $a.

      I         Insert before the first nonwhitespace character on the
                current line. This is equivalent to Ai.

Insert Mode Commands
   Some editing can be done on text entered during insert mode, using the
   following control characters:
      backspace     Delete the last character entered.

      A   H         Same as "backspace" character.

      A   D         Same as ''backspace'' character.

      AX            Erase to beginning of insert on current line.

      AV            Enter next character into text without attempting to in-
                    terpret it.

   AV is used to enter nonprinting characters into the text. For example, to
   enter the character Control-A into the text, type
      "'V"'A

   That is, hold down the control key, then type the V key, then the A key, then
   release the control key. As mentioned earlier, nonprinting characters are
   displayed as two characters: "A" followed by a character whose ASCII code
   equals that of the nonprinting character plus Ox40.
                               Aztec C UniTools



Autoindent
   The Z autoindent option is useful when entering C programs. When you
   are in insert mode and type the carriage return key with the autoindent
   option enabled, the cursor automatically indents on the new line to the
   same column on which the first nonwhitespace character appeared on the
   previous line. This feature is useful for editing C programs because it
   encourages statements that are part of the same compound statement to be
   indented the same amount, thus making the program more readable.
   Z autoindents a line by inserting tab and space characters at the beginning
   of a new line. If you do not want the lines indented that much, backspace
   over these automatically inserted tabs and spaces until you reach the
   desired degree of indentation.
   The autoindent option can be selectively enabled and disabled using the
   set options command:
      :se ai=O          Disables autoindent.

      :se ai=l          Enables auto indent.

   When Z is activated, autoindent is enabled.

MACROS
   Z allows you to define a sequence of commands, called a MACRO, and then
   execute the macro one or more times.
   When a macro is defined to Z, it is placed in a special buffer, called the macro
   buffer, and then executed once. There are two ways to define a macro to Z:
   immediately and indirectly.

Immediate Macro Definition
   An immediate macro definition is initiated by typing the characters
       :>
   Z responds by clearing the status line, displaying these characters on the
   line, and waiting for you to enter the sequence of commands.
                Z Editor



  As you enter the commands, Z displays them on the status line and enters
  them immediately into the macro buffer, hence the term IMMEDIATE MACRO
  DEFINITION.

  If you make a mistake while entering commands, you can simply backspace
   and enter the correct characters.
  To terminate the definition, type the carriage return key. Z then executes
  the sequence of commands in the macro buffer. The contents of this buffer
  are not altered by executing the macro, so you can reexecute the macro
  without reentering it, as described below.

Examples
   The following macro advances the cursor one line and deletes the first word
   on the new line:
      :>+dw
   This macro contains two commands: +, which advances the cursor, and dw,
   which deletes the word beneath the cursor.
   The next macro moves the cursor to the previous line and deletes the last
   character on the line:
      :>-$x
   It contains three commands:·, which moves the cursor to the previous line;
   $, which moves the cursor to the last character on that line; and x, which
   deletes the character beneath the cursor.
  You can also insert text using a macro. You enter insert mode using one of
  the normal insert commands. The characters that follow the insert com-
  mand on the macro line, up to a terminating escape character, are then
  inserted into the text. The escape character causes Z to return to command
  mode and continue executing commands in the macro that follow the insert
  command.
  For example, the following macro advances the cursor to the next line,
  deletes the second word on the line, inserts the character string "and
  furthermore", and deletes the last word on the line:
      :>+wdwiand furthe~ore <ESC>$bdw
                             Aztec C UniTools



The last macro contains the following commands:
   +         Advances the cursor to the next line.

   w         Moves the cursor to the second word on the line.

   iand furthermore <esc>
      Inserts the text and furthermore . <ESC> stands for
        the escape key.
   $          Moves the cursor to the last character on the line.

   b          Moves the cursor to the beginning of the last word on
              the line.

   dw         Deletes the word beneath the cursor.

Z also allows you to search for a string from within a macro. Enter the string
search command in the macro (for example, I), followed by the string,
followed by the ESC character. For example, the following macro moves
the cursor to the word Melinda and deletes it:
   :>/Melinda<ESC>dw


It contains the commands
   /Melinda<ESC> Moves the cursor to Melinda. <ESC> stands for
                          the escape key.
   dw                     Deletes Melinda.
The following macro finds Melinda and replaces it with John:
   :>/Melinda<ESC>cwJohn<ESC>
It contains the commands:
   /Melinda <ESC>            Moves the cursor to Melinda

   cwJohn <ESC>              Changes Melinda to John.
                Z Editor



Indirect Macro Definition
   The other way of defining a macro is to yank a line containing a sequence
   of commands from the main text buffer into a named buffer.
   Commands for indirect macro definition are:
      @x        Causes Z to move the contents of the x buffer to the
                macro buffer and then execute it once.

      "xv       A synonym for @x.

   Indirect macro definition of macros has several advantages over immediate
   definition: For one, if a macro defined immediately is incorrect, you have
   to reenter the entire macro. With an indirectly defined macro, you can edit
   the macro definition in the main text buffer and then move it back to the
   macro buffer.
   Another advantage is that you can store several macros in the named
   buffers and easily reexecute a macro, without having to reenter it. With
   immediate definition, when a new macro is defined, the previously defined
   macro is lost and must be reentered to be reexecuted.
   One difference between entering macros immediately and via the named
   buffer concerns the method for specifying the end of a search string and for
   exiting insert mode. With immediate definition, you do this by typing the
   ESC key directly. For indirect definition, in which the macro is first entered
   into the main text buffer, typing the ESC key would cause Z to exit insert
   mode, not to enter the ESC key into the text of the macro. In this case, you
   enter the ESC key by first typing Control-V, then ESC. This causes Z to enter
   the ESC character into the text of the macro and remain in insert mode.


Reexecutlng Macros
   Once a macro is defined and is in the macro buffer, it can be reexecuted by
   typing one of the commands:
       @
       v
                               Aztec C UniTools



   Preceding the command with a count causes the macro to be executed the
   specified number of times.


Wrapping Around During Macro Execution
   While executing a macro, Z may reach the beginning or end of the text, and
   want to continue beyond that point. This is especially true when reexecut-
   ing macros. The macro wrap option, wm, specifies whether Z should
   terminate the macro execution at that point, or continue at the opposite end
   of the text.
   This option is enabled and disabled using the set options command:
      :sewm=O          Disables macro wrapping.

      :sewm=l          Enables macro wrapping.

   When Z starts, this option is enabled.

EX-LIKE COMMANDS
   The SUBSTITUTE and REPEAT LAST SUBSTITUTE commands are a set of
   commands in the Z editor that are similar to commands in the UNIX Ex
   edi tor. This section describes the syn tax for these commands, and then gives
   details about the substitute and repeat last substitute commands.
   The ex-like commands consist of a leading colon, followed by zero, one, or
   two addresses identifying the lines to be affected by the command, followed
   by a single-letter command, followed by command parameters, and ter-
   minated by a carriage return. Most commands have a default set of lines
   that they affect, thus frequently allowing you to enter commands without
   explicitly specifying a range.
   These commands support regular expressions, as defined in the Z
   documentation, for identifying addresses and strings to be searched for.
                Z Editor



Addresses In Ex Commands
   An address can be one of the following:

      • A period, ., addresses the current line; that is, the line on which
        the cursor is located.

      • The character $ addresses the last line in the edit buffer.

      • A decimal number n addresses the n-th line in the edit buffer.

      • 'x addresses the line marked with the mark name x. Lines are
        marked with the m command.

      • A regular expression surrounded by slashes (I) addresses the
        first line containing a string that matches the regular expression.
        The search begins with the line following the current line and
        continues toward the end of the edit buffer. If a line is not found
        when the end of the buffer is reached, and if the Z option ws is
        set to 1 (i.e., by the :se ws=l command), the search continues at
        the beginning of the buffer, stopping when the current line is
        reached.

      • A regular expression surrounded by question marks (?) also ad-
        dresses the first line containing a string that matches the regular
        expression. But in this case, the search begins with the line
        preceding the current line in the edit buffer and continues
        towards the beginning of the buffer. If a line is not found when
        the beginning of the buffer is reached, and if the Z option ws is
        set to 1 (Le., by the :se ws=l command), the search continues at
        the end of the buffer, stopping when the current line is reached.

      • An address followed by a plus or a minus sign, which in tum is
        followed by a decimal number n addresses the n-th line follow-
        ing or preceding the line identified by the address.

   When two addresses are entered to define the range of lines affected by a
   command, the addresses are usually separated by a comma. They can also
   be separated by a semicolon; in this latter case, the current line is set to the
   line defined by the first address, and then the line corresponding to the
   second address is located.
                               Aztec C UniTools



   When no value is specified for the first address in an address range, it is
   assumed to be the current line or the first line in the buffer, depending on
   whether the second address was preceded with a comma or a semicolon.
   When no value is specified for the second address in an address range, it is
   assumed to be the last line in the buffer. Thus, if neither the beginning nor
   the ending address of a range is specified, the range consists of either all
   the lines in the buffer or the lines from the current through the last line in
   the buffer, depending on whether comma or semicolon is used to separate
   the unspecified addresses.

The Substitute Command
   The substitute command has the following form:
      :[range]s Ipat Irep I [options]

   where square brackets surround a parameter to indicate that the parameter
   is optional.
   Z searches the lines specified by range for strings that match the regular
   expression pat, replacing them with the rep string. If range is not specified,
   only the current line is searched. When the command is completed, the
   cursor is left on the character following the last replaced string.

The c Option
   Normally, Z automatically replaces a string that matches pat. Specifying c
   as an option causes Z instead to pause when it finds a matching string, ask
   if you want the string to be replaced, and make the replacement only if you
   give your permission.

The 9 Option
   Z replaces only the first pat-matching string on a line. Specifying g as an
   option causes Z instead to replace all matching strings on a line. In this case,
   after Z replaces a string on a line, it continues searching for more strings on
   the line at the character following the replaced string.
   An ampersand (&) in the replacement string rep is replaced by the string
   that matched pat. The special meaning of & can be suppressed by preceding
   it with a backslash, \.
                   Z Editor



   A replacement string consisting of just the percent character (%) is replaced
   in the current substitution by the replacement string that was used in the
   last substitution. The special meaning of % can be suppressed by preceding
   it with a backslash, \.

Examples
      :s/aBD/def/

           Search the line on which the cursor is located for the string
           aBD; if found, replace it with the string def .

       :l,$s/ab*c/xyz/

           Search all lines in the edit buffer for strings that begin with a,
           end in c, and have zero or more b's in between; replace such
           strings with xyz. On any given line, only the first occurrence
           of a string that matches the pattern is replaced.

       :/{/;/}/s/for/while/c

           Find the first line following the current line that contains a { ;
           then find the first line following this line that contains a } . In
           the lines between and including these lines, search for the
           string for. For each such string, ask if it should be replaced; if
           yes, replace it with while.

The "&" (Repeat Last Substitute) Command
   The & command has the form
      :[range] &

   where brackets indicate that the parameters are optional.
   The & command causes the last substitute command to be executed again,
   using the same search pattern, replacement string, and options as were used
   in the previous command. The command searches the lines that are
   specified in the & command range; if range is not specified, the substitution
   is performed on only the current line.
                                Aztec C UniTools



QUIKFIX COMMANDS
  With version 5 of Aztec C, z now supports the following five commands to
  be used in conjunction with the QuikFix facility.
     :cc        redisplay current error

     :cp        display previous error

     :cn        display next error

  Using any of the above commands will load the source file if not already
  loaded and move to the appropriate line and column and display the error
  message.
     :cf        This command is used to parse the next set of errors
                from the AztecC.Err file. Saying z -e is the same as
                saying z and then giving the : cf command. This can be
                used if more than 25 errors are in the error file or if the
                error file contains errors for more than one source file.

      :cq       This command works the same as the :q command to
                exit z, except that it causes z to return an error code in-
                stead of the normal non-error code. This is used to cause
                the compiler not to recompile the module when z ter-
                minates

  For additional information on the QuikFix facility, refer to the Getting
  Started Chapter of the Aztec C User Manual

THE OPTION FILE
  Z contains several options for controlling its operation in different situa-
  tions, including the autoindent and macro wrap. (This manual contains a
  complete list of these commands at the end of this chapter.) This section
  presents another feature of Z related to options; i.e., the ability to set options
  automatically, when Z is started.
  When Z starts, it reads options from the file specified by the 20PT environ-
  ment variable, if it exists.
  The environment variable 20PT defines the name of the options file.
                   Z Editor



    Each line in the options file defines the value of one option, with a statement
    of the form
       opt = val
   where opt is the name of the option, and val is its value. For example, the
   following sets the tab-width option to eight characters:
       ts=8


The ZOPT Environment Variable
   The ZOPT environment variable defines the file in which :set options are
   found.
   For example, the following command says that the options are in the file
   zopt.cmci:
       set ZOPT=zopt.cmci

Setting Options for a File
   When Z makes a file the edit file by reading it into the edit buffer, the file
   itself specifies the options to be in effect during its edit session. This feature
   is most useful in editing files that have different tab settings.
   A file specifies option values by including strings of the form
       :opt=val
   in the first ten lines of the file. For example, the following line could be used
   near the front of a C program, causing a tab width of eight characters to be
   used:
       /*     :ts=8      */
   When Z starts editing a file, the tab width is set back to the default value,
   four characters, before the file is scanned for option settings.


STARTING AND STOPPING Z
   You already know how to start and stop Z. This section presents more
   information related to starting and stopping Z.
                                  Aztec C UniTools



Starting Z
   Previously, we said that Z was started by specifying the name of the file to
   be edited on the command line:
       Zfilename
   You may also start Z without specifying a filename or by specifying a list of
   files to be edited.

Starting Z without a Filename
   Z can be started without specifying a filename, by entering the command:
       Z

   When you start Z wi thout specifying filename, once it is acti ve you normally
   tell Z the name of the file to be edited using the :e command:
       :efilename
   However, it is not necessary for Z to know the name of the file you are
   editing immediately upon opening: Z allows you to create and modify text
   in the text buffer without knowing the name of the file to which you intend
   to write the text. But you must explicitly tell Z to write the text to filename
   when you want to save the text that you worked on. You would use the
   command
       :w filename

    Z cannot automatically write the text, because it does not know which file
    you are editing.

Starting Z with a List of Files
    You may start Z and pass it a list of names of files to be edited, as follows:
       Z file1 file2 ...

    Z remembers the list, and makes the first file in the list the edit file; that is,
    reads the file into the main text buffer and allows it to be edited.
    Z contains a command, :n, that makes the next file in the list the edit file,
    after writing the contents of the text buffer back to the current edit file. File
    lists are discussed in more detail below.
               Z Editor



Stopping Z
   Previously, we presented the following commands for stopping Z:
      ZZ        If the file text in the edit buffer is modified, Z writes the
                text to the file, after changing the extension of the
                original file to .bak.

      :q!       Stops Z without writing the text to the file.

   Three other commands for exiting Z are:
      :wq       Writes the text to the buffer, similar to, except that the
                text in the main text buffer is always written to the file,
                even if no changes have been made.

      :q        Conditionally stops Z. If no changes were made to the
                file text, Z stops; otherwise, it displays a message and
                remains active.

      :cq       Works the same as the:q command to exit the editor, ex-
                cept that it causes the editor to return an error code in-
                stead of the normal non-error code. This is used to tell
                the compiler not to recompile the module when the
                editor terminates.

ACCESSING FILES
   This section discusses some additional commands for accessing files. For
   example, Z usually knows the name of the file you are editing, and in the
   sections that follow we will call this the edit file. Z makes use of this
   knowledge, allowing you to write to the edit file without specifying it by
   name. For example, the ZZ command writes text to the edit file without
   requiring you to enter the name of the file.
   Some commands allow you to access files without redefining Z's idea of
   the edit file. The commands described in the next two subsections fall into
   this category.
   Other commands cause Z to terminate editing of one file and begin editing
   another; this new file becomes the edit file. The commands described in the
   other subsections of this section are of this type.
                                  Aztec C UniTools



Filenames
   In the Z commands that require a filename, you enter the name using the
   standard system conventions. However, some characters are special to Z:
       #          Refers to the last edit file.

       %          Refers to the current edit file.

       \          Causes the next character to be used in the filename and
                  not be interpreted.

   To enter a filename that contains these characters, precede the special
   character with the character "\".

Writing Flies
   The command:w writes the contents of the main text buffer to a file, without
   redefining the identity of the current edit file. It has the following forms:
       :w                    Write to the current edit file.
       :w filename           Write to the specified file
       :wfilename            Same as:w filename, but the file is overwritten if
                             it exists.
    As with all colon commands, carriage return must be typed to cause Z to
    execute the command.
    When entered without a filename,:w creates a new file having the name of
    the current edit file and writes the contents of the edit buffer to it. This form
    of the :w command is commonly used to periodically save text during a
    long edit session, as protection against possible system failures.
    The option bk tells Z whether it should save the original edit file before
    creating a new one. If bk is I, the original is saved, and if 0, it is not. Z saves
    the original file by changing its name to .bak. An existing .bak file is erased
    before the rename occurs.
    When a filename is entered with the:w command, the text is written to that
    file if it does not already exist. If it does, nothing is written and Z displays
    a message on the status line; in this case you must use the :w! form of the
    command to overwrite the file.
                 Z Editor



   The :w! command unconditionally writes the text to the specified file after
   truncating the file, if it exists, so that nothing is in it. Unlike the:w command
   that does not specify a filename, the :w! command does not save the original
   file as a .bak file.

Reading Files
   The command
      :rfilename
   merges one file with a file being edited, without redefining the identity of
   the edit file. It reads the contents of the specified file into the main text
   buffer, inserting the new text following the line on which the cursor is
   located. It does not alter text that is already in the edit buffer.

Editing Another File
   The following commands cause Z to stop editing one file and begin editing
   another, which then becomes the edit file:
      :efilename            Edi t the specified file.
      :e! filename          Edit the file, discarding changes to the current
                            edit file.
      :e                    Reload the current edit file.
      :el                   Reload the current edit file, discarding changes.
      :e #                  Edit the previous edit file.
      /\/\                  Synonym for:e #. (the command is control-A).
   Z begins editing another file by erasing the contents of the main text buffer,
   resetting the tab width to four characters, redrawing the display with the
   first screenful of lines from the file, and setting the cursor at the first
   character in the text.
   When switching to a new edit file, Z does not change the contents of the
   named and unnamed buffers. Thus, these buffers can be used to hold text
   that is to be moved from one file to another and to contain commonly used
   macros.
                              Aztec C UniTools



The command
    :efilename
causes the specified file to conditionally become the edit file. The condition
is that changes must not have been made to the text of the current edit file
since it was last written to disk. If this condition is met, then the switch is
made; otherwise, Z displays a message on the status line and nothing is
changed: The identity of the edit file is the same, the contents of the edit
buffer are not modified, and the options are not changed.
If Z does not let you switch edit files when you enter
   :efilename
and you want to save the changes to the current edit file, enter the sequence:
   :w
   :efilename
You can unconditionally cause Z to begin editing a new file by entering:
   :e! filename
In this case, Z does not care whether or not you made changes to the current
edit file since it was last written to disk; it begins editing the new file without
changing the previous edit file.
Sometimes the text in the edit file may get hopelessly scrambled, and you
want to get a fresh copy of the edit file contents. The command
   :e!
specified without a filename does just that.
Z not only remembers the name of the current edit file you are editing; it
remembers the name of the last file you edited as well. Z allows you to refer
to this name using the character # in :e commands, thus providing a quick
means to reedit the previous edit file:
   :e #
causes the previous edit file to conditionally become the current edit file,
and
   :e! #
                  Z Editor



    causes it to unconditionally become the edit file.
    The command AA (that is, Control-A) is a synonym for:e #.
    Z also remembers the position at which the cursor was located in the
    previous edit file, and when you begin reediting this file it sets the cursor
    back to this position.

File Lists
    Z's file list feature is convenient to use when you have several files to edit.
    You pass Z a list of the files and begin editing the first one. When you are
    finished with one file, a command switches to the next file in the list, after
    you have explicitly saved the changes to the current edit file. An option to
    the command prevents Z from saving changes, and another command
    rewinds the file list so that you are back editing the first file in the list again.
    There are two ways to pass the list of files to be edited to Z: as parameters
    to the command that starts Z, and as parameters to the :n command. In each
    case, Z remembers the list and makes the first file in the list the edit file. For
    example,
       Z filel file2 file3
    startsZ and defines the list offiles---filel , file2, and file3. Zmakes
    f ilel the edit file; that is, prepares it for editing by reading it into the edit
    buffer and displaying its first lines.
    When Z is active, the command
        :n file4 fileS file6
    defines a new list offiles-file4, fileS and file6. Z makes file4 the
    edit file.
    When used without a files list, the :n command switches from one file in
    the list to the next:
        :n!
    Switches without writing anything to the current edit file.
    The :rew command rewinds the file list, i.e., makes the first file in the list
    the edit file. This command behaves like the :n command, in that any
    change to the current edit file must be rewritten before rewinding; and
                                Aztec C UniTools



   when an exclamation mark is appended to the command, the rewind
   occurs, regardless of the state of the current edit file.

Tags
   Z has a feature useful for editing large C programs that contain many
   functions distributed over several files. With the aid of a cross-reference file
   relating tags, (i.e., function names), to the files containing them, you simply
   tell Z the name of the function that you want to edit and Z makes the file
   containing it the edit file by reading it into the edit buffer and positioning
   the cursor to the function.
   The following commands specify the tag of the function to be edited:
       :ta tag      Position to the function named tag in the appropriate
                    file, if the current edit file is up to date

       :ta! tag     Same as :ta tag, but the switch to the new file occurs
                    even if the current edit file is not up to date.

   When using the :ta command, the current edit file is considered up to date
   if the text in the edit buffer has not been modified since it was last written
   to the file. When used without the trailing !, the :ta command does not
   switch edit files if the current edit file is not up to date; it only displays a
   message on the status line. You can then either write the text in the edit
   buffer to the file and reenter the :ta command, or immediately enter the :ta!
   command, to switch edit files anyway.
   If tag ends up in the current file, it works regardless of the current file's
   modification status.
   The command


   Control-], is convenient when, while editing or viewing one function, you
   want to edit or examine a function that it calls. You just set the cursor to the
   name of the called function and enter 1\]; Z makes the file containing the
   called function the edit file, and positions the cursor to this function.
   For example, while examining the file crtdvr . c, you may corne across a
   call to the function pcdvr, and may want to take a look at it. By positioning
   the cursor at the beginning of the word pcdvr and typing 1\], Z makes
                  Z Editor



    the file containing pcdvr the edit file and leaves the cursor positioned at
    this function.

The ctags Utility
   The utility program ctags creates the cross reference file, tags, that relates
   function names to the file containing them. ctags is activa ted by a command
   of the form
       ctags filel file2 ...
   where filel, ..., are names of files whose functions are to be placed in the
   cross reference file. A filename can specify a group of files using the
   character *. For example:
       *.c
   specifies all files whose extension is . c, and
       £*.c
   specifies all files whose first character is £ and whose extension is . c.
   ctags creates the cross reference file, tags, in the current directory on the
   default drive.
   When a tags command is given, Z searches for this file in the current
   directory.

OPTIONS
    Z provides several options under user control that define how Z behaves
    in certain situations. Most of these options have been discussed peripheral-
    ly in previous sections, when appropriate. This section focuses on the
    options.
    Each option is identified by a code. The options and their codes are:
       ai          Auto-indent option. When this option is enabled and
                   you begin inserting text on a new line, Z automatically
                   indents the line by inserting tabs and spaces so that the
                   text you type is correctly aligned with the text in the line
                   above it. By default, this option is enabled.
                   Aztec C UniTools



eb   Error bells option. When this option is enabled, Z beeps
     when you make a mistake. By default, this option is
     enabled.

ma   Magic option. When this option is enabled, regular ex-
     pressions used in string searches can include extended
     pattern matching characters. Otherwise, only the charac-
     ters A and $ are special and the extended pattern match-
     ing constructs are gotten by preceding them with \. By
     default, this option is disabled.

ts   Tab Set Option. Specifies the number of characters be-
     tween tab settings. By default, the tab width is four char-
     acters.

wm   Wrap On Macro Option. When this option is enabled,
     and a macro being executed reaches the end of the buff-
     er, the macro wraps around to the beginning of the buff-
     er and continues. By default, this option is enabled.

ws   Wrap On Search Option. When this option is enabled
     and a search for a string reaches the end of the buffer
     without finding the string, the search continues at the
     opposite end of the buffer. By default, this option is
     enabled.

bk   Defines whether Z, when a :w command is entered to
     write the edit buffer to the current edit file, should save
     the original edit file before creating a new one.

cs   Clear Screen Option. When this option is enabled, the
     repaint command (Control-L) will first clear the entire
     screen and then repaint it. If it is disabled, each line of
     text on the screen will be redrawn and then cleared to
     the end of the line. Some systems redraw the screen
     much faster if this option is enabled.

sm   Silent Macro Option. When this option is enabled,
     macros operate silently. If it is disabled, macros display
               Z Editor



               their commands as they execute. The main advantage to
               silent operation is that it is faster.

  An option is enabled by setting it to 1, and disabled by setting it to O.

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN Z AND VI
  Z is very similar to the UNIX editor Vi, in the following ways:

     • Both are full-screen editors, display text in the same way, and
       reserve one line of the display for messages;

     • They have the same two modes: command and insert;

     • Z supports most of the Vi commands. The Z commands are ac-
       tivated by the same keystrokes and perform the same functions
       as their Vi counterparts.

  Z and Vi differ in the following ways:

     • In Z, the buffer in which text is edited is entirely within RAM
       memory; in Vi, the buffer is both in memory and on disk. Be-
       cause of this, Z is restricted in the size of program that can be
       edited, but Vi is not;

     • A single copy of Vi can be configured to use any type terminal. A
       single copy of Z is pre-configured to use just one terminal;

     • Vi has an underlying editor, ex, whose commands can be ex-
       ecuted while Vi is active. Z does not have an underlying editor.
       However, Z does support some ex commands directly; these are
       the commands whose first character is ";". (Vi interprets the ";" as
       a request to execute the ex command which is entered after the
       ":");

     • Vi has commands and options useful for editing documents and
       for editing LISP programs, but Z does not;

     • With Vi, you can create a shell and suspend Vi while executing
       commands from within the new shell. With some Vis, you can
                       Aztec C UniTools


 also suspend Vi while executing commands from the shell that
 activated Vi. Z does not support either of these features;

• Vi saves the last nine deleted blocks of text and has commands
  with which it can recover them, if necessary. Z lets you recover
  the last deleted block;

• With Vi, operator commands can affect exactly the characters be-
  tween the starting and ending cursor positions, even when the
  positions are on different lines. Z has variations of these com-
  mands which allow whole lines to be affected, between and in-
  cluding the lines containing the two positions.

In Z, operator commands in which the starting and ending cursor
positions are on different lines always affect whole lines, between and
including the lines containing the two positions.
                  Z Editor



Command Summary
Starting Z

      zname      edit file name
      z namel name2 ....
                 edit file name1, rest via :n

The Display

       -lines        lines past end of file
       @lines        lines that do not fit on screen
                     control characters
       tabs          expand to spaces, cursor on last

Options

       ak            allows you to move the cursor via the keyboard arrow
                     keys

       ai={110}      auto-indent                            {on I off}
       eb={110}      error bells                            {on I off}
       ma={Oll}      magic                                  {off Ion}
       ts=val        tab width                              (default is 4)
       wm={110}      wrap on search when executing macro {on I off}
       ws={110}      wrap on search scan                    {on Ioff}
       bk={110}      save original file as .bak             {on I off}
       sm={lIO}      indicates whether or not macros perform their opera-
                     tions silently                         {on Ioff}

       cs={110}      determines whether screen is cleared during repaint
                                                             {on I off}

Adjusting the Screen

      1\ F           forward screenful
      1\ B           backward screenful
                             Aztec C UniTools


      1\D          scroll down half screen
      I\U          scroll up half screen
      zCR          redraw, current line at top
      z-           redraw, current line at bottom
      z.           redraw, current line at center
Positioning within File

       g         go to line (default is end of file)
       G         go to line (default is beginning of file)
      Ipat       move cursor to pat searching forwards
      ?pat       move cursor to pat searching backwards
      n          repeat last I or ?
      N          repeat last I or ? in reverse direction
      ]]         next nl\{n
      [[         previous n I\{n
      %          find matching 0, {}, or [].
Marking and Returning

                   previous context
       "           first nonwhite at previous context
       mx          mark position with letter x
       IX          to mark x
      'x           first nonwhite at mark x
Line Positioning

       H           top of screen
       M           middle of screen
       L           bottom of screen
       +           next line, first nonwhite
       CR          next line, first nonwhite
                   previous line, first non-white
       LF          next line, same column
                   next line, same column
       1\   K      previous line, same column
               Z Editor



      k              previous line, same column
Character Positioning
      o              beginning of line
      II.            first nonwhite at beginning of line
      $              end of line
      space          forward a character
      II.L           forward a character
                     forward a character
                     backwards a character
                     backwards a character
                     find character x forward
      Fx             find character x backwards
      tx             position before character x forward
      Tx             position before character x backwards
                     repeat last £, F, tor T
                     repeat last £, F, t or T in reverse direction
                     move to specified column number
Words and Paragraphs
      w              word forward
      W              blank delimited word forward
      b              back word
      B              back blank delimited word
      e              end of word
      E              end of blank delimited word
      }              to next blank line
      {              to previous blank line
Insert and Replace
      a              append after cursor
      A              append at end of line
                     insert before cursor
      I              insert before first non-blank in line
                             Aztec C UniTools



      o           open line below current line
      o           open line above current line
      rx          replace single character with x
      R           replace characters
Corrections During Insert

      AH          erase last character
      A0          erase last character
      AX          erase to beginning of insert on current line
      AV          insert following character directly
      AW          delete previous word typed
Operators
      d           delete
      c           delete and insert
      «           left shift
      »           right shift
      y           yank
Miscellaneous Operations
      o           delete rest of line
      C           change rest of line
      s           substitute characters
      s           substitute lines
      J           join lines
      x           delete characters starting at cursor
      X           delete characters before cursor
      Y           yank lines
Yank and Put

      p           put after current
      P           put before current
      "xp         put from buffer x
      "xy         yank to buffer x
      "xd         delete to buffer x
                Z Editor



Undo and Redo
     u                undo last change
     u                restore current line
                      repeat last change command
Macros
     @x               execute macro in buffer x
     "xv              execute macro in buffer x
     @@               repeat last macro
     v                repeat last macro
QulkFlx Commands
     :cc              redisplay current error
     :cn              display next error
     :cp              display previous error
     :cq              terminate with error condition
     :cf              parse next set of errors
Colon Commands
     :e name          edit file name
     :e               reedit last file
     :e!name          edit file name, discarding changes
     :e!              reedit last file, discarding changes
     :e #             edit alternate file
     1\1\             edit alternate file
     :e! #            edit alternate file, discarding changes
     :fn              searches the file func1ist or the environment variable
                      FUNCLIST for a specified string; also invoked by
                      typing 1\_.

     :r name          read file name into current file
     :w               write back to file being edited
     :wq              write back to file and quit
     :wname           write to file name if does not exist
     :w!name          write to file name, delete if exists
                        Aztec C UniTools



:q                quit
:q!               quit, discarding changes
:x                quit, saving file if modified
ZZ                quit, saving file if modified
:f                show current file and line
:fname            change name of current file
AG                show current file and line
:n                edit next file in list
:n!               edit next file in list, discarding change
:n argl arg2 .... specify new list
:rew              point back to beginning of list
:rew!             point back to beginning, discarding changes
:ta tag           position to tag in appropriate file, searches file
                  pointed to by environment variable TAGS if tags
                  does not exist or tag is not found in it.

A]               same as :ta using word at cursor
:ta! tag         position to tag, discarding changes
:>macro          specify and execute immediate macro

:set optl=val    set editor options
opt2=val ...
:se optl=val     set editor options
opt2=val ...

:set all         display current option settings

:[range]slpatlrepl[options]
                 substitute rep format in range

:[range]&        repeat last substitute command
                                                     Index

    $,grep, 3-2
    *,grep, 3-2 - 3-3
    ?,grep, 3-3

A
    aborting make, 4-15
    accessing files, Z editor, 5-39, 5-45
    adding lines, diff, 2-2
    AFLAGS macro, make, 4-11, 4-14
          value, 4-14
    arcv, make, 4-20
    arguments, grep, 3-2
    assembly language source file, make, 4-21
    autoindent, Z editor, 5-5, 5-28

B
    backslash, make, 4-16
    backspace key, Z editor, 5-5
    backup files, Z editor, 5-6
    batch commands, make,4-14
    blanks, diff, 2-4
    buffer, Z editor, 5-7, 5-23 - 5-24
    built-in rules, make,4-14

c
    CFLAGS macro, make, 4-11, 4-14
         value, 4-14
    changing lines, diff, 2-2
    character positioning commands, Z editor, 5-51
    character strings
         make, 4-2, 4-9
         Z editor, 5-14
    colon commands, Z editor, 5-53
    command line, diff, 2-2
    command line, make, 4-15, 4-18
          makefile, 4-10
          maximum length, 4-16
          optional parameters, 4-18
    command mode, Z editor, 5-6
    command sequence, make, 4-2
    components, Z editor, 5-3
    control keys, Z editor, 5-12
    conversion lists, diff, 2-1
          types of operations, 2-2
    correction insert commands, Z editor, 5-52
    creating new program, Z editor, 5-3
    ctags utility, Z editor, 5-3,5-45
    current directory, make, 4-17
    cursor motion commands, Z editor, 5-17
          examples, 5-9
    cursor positioning, Z editor, 5-7

D
    default drive, make, 4-17
    definition
          diff,I-1
          grep, 1-2
          make, 1-2
          makefile, 4-3
          named buffers, Z editor, 5-24
          regular expression, Z editor, 5-14
          Z editor, 1-2,5-1
    deleting lines, diff, 2-2
    deleting text, Z editor, 5-21 - 5-23
    dependency entries, make
          definition, 4-3
          makefile, 4-3, 4-10,4-18
    dependency lines, make
          maximum length, 4-17
    dependent files, make, 4-8 - 4-9
    Developer Level, 1-1
    diff
          examples, 2-2 - 2-4
          -b option, 2-4


                                       ii
          adding lines, 2-2
          blanks, 2-4
          changing lines, 2-2
          command line, 2-2
          conversion items, 2-2 - 2-3
          conversion list, 2-1
          definition, 1-1
          deleting lines, 2-2
          directory names, 2-5
          file length, 2-4
          range of lines, 2-2
          replacing lines, 2-2
          UNIX options not supported, 2-4 - 2-5
    directory names, diff, 2-5
    directory, make
          recording time and date, 4-3
    display commands, Z editor, 5-49
    duplicating text, Z editor, 5-23 - 5-24

E
    editing, Z editor, 5-5, 5-41 - 5-42
          examples, 5-42
          another file, 5-41
          syntax, 5-41
    environment variable
          ZOPT,5-36
    escape key, Z editor, 5-12
    Ex-like commands, Z editor
          n&n command, 5-35
          addresses, 5-33
          arguments, 5-32
          c option, 5-34
          g option, 5-34
          repeat last substitute command, 5-32
          substitute command, 5-32, 5-34

F
    file extension, make, 4-6
    file length, diff, 2-4


                                     iii
    file list feature, Z editor, 5-43
    file parameter, grep, 3-3
    file specification, grep, 3-2

G
    go command, Z editor, 5-8
    grep, 5-14
          definition, 1-2, 3-2 - 3-3, 3-7 - 3-8
          $,3-5
          -c option, 3-3
          -f option, 3-3
          -1 option, 3-3
          -n option, 3-3
          -v option, 3-3
          HA]], 3-4
          [], 3-5
          \,3-6
          ,0..,3-5
          arguments, 3-2
          file parameter, 3-3
          file specification, 3-2
          multiple file support, 3-2
          multiple options, 3-8
          patterns, 3-1 - 3-2
          simple string matching, 3-7
          special patterns examples, 3-5 - 3-6, 3-8
          special patterns list, 3-4
          standard input, 3-3
          UNIX similarities and differences, 3-1, 3-7
          wildcard characters, 3-2 - 3-3
          x*,3-6


    indirect macro definition, 5-31
    insert mode, Z editor, 5-10
          A W command, 5-5
          command list, 5-26
          commands, 5-27, 5-51
          exiting, 5-5, 5-12


                                        iv
          i,5-4
          memory-resident buffer, 5-4
    interfile dependencies
          makefile, 4-1

L
    line movement commands, Z editor, 5-15 - 5-17
    local moves, Z editor, 5-16
    logging commands, make, 4-15

M
    macro buffer, Z editor, 5-28
    macros, make, 4-9
         examples, 4-10 - 4-12
         $$,4-11
         $*,4-11
         $@,4-11
         AFLAGS,4-11,4-14
         built-in rules, 4-11
         capabilities, 4-2
         CFLAGS,4-11,4-14
         command line, 4-12
         defining in command line, 4-11
         invoking, 4-10
         names, 4-2
         naming, 4-10
         option -DFLOAT, 4-12
        used by buil t-in rules, 4-11
    macros, Z editor, 5-2, 5-29 - 5-32, 5-53
         immediate macro definition, 5-28 - 5-30
        indirect macro definition, 5-31
        reexecuting, 5-31
    make
        examples, 4-21
        aborting, 4-15
        advanced features, 4-8
         arcv,4-20
         assembly language listing, 4-13
         assembly language source file, 4-21


                                        v
backslash,4-16
batch commands, 4-14
built-in rules, 4-11, 4-14
C source file, 4-21
character strings, 4-2,4-9
colon, 4-13
command execution, 4-15
command line, 4-12,4-15,4-18
command line length, 4-15 - 4-16
command line parameters, 4-18
command sequence, 4-2
comments, 4-16
creating a makefile, 4-2
current directory, 4-17
default drive, 4-17
default rules, 4-2
definition, 1-2
dependency lines, length, 4-17
dependent files, 4-8 - 4-9
disk file, 4-14
file extension, 4-6
filenames, 4-9
interfile dependencies, 4-1
line continuation, 4-16
logging commands, 4-15
macro definition example, 4-16
make file, 4-1
mkarcv, 4-20
naming conventions, 4-9
null character string, 4-11,4-14
object files, 4-9
object files, removing, 4-21
operating system commands, 4-14
overriding rules, 4-8
parameters, 4-18
path, 4-9
prerequisite files, 4-3 - 4-4
printing error messages, 4-18
recording time and date, 4-3
redirecting standard output, 4-18


                           vi
    return code, 4-15
    rule definition, 4-12
    rule-processing capability, 4-2
    rules, 4-2, 4-6, 4-12
    rules built-in, 4-6
    rules, target extension, 4-6
    sequence of commands, rules, 4-6
    source extension, 4-12
    source extension, rules, 4-6
    special characters,examples, 4-15
    standard output, 4-18
    starting, 4-17, 4-21
    syntax, 4-17 - 4-18
    tab character, 4-13
    target extension, 4-12
    target file creation, 4-17
    target files, 4-3, 4-9
    UNIX options not supported, 4-19
    UNIX similarities and differences, 4-19
    volume, 4-9
make built-in rules
    examples, 4-7
    .asm to .0 rule, 4-7
    .c to .0 rule, 4-6 - 4-8
make options
    -DDEBUG option, 4-14
    -t option, 4-14
    b option, 4-19
    d optio, 4-19
    e option, 4-19
    i option, 4-19
    k option, 4-19
    m option, 4-19
    n option, 4-19
    q option, 4-19
    r option, 4-19
    s option, 4-19
    t option, 4-19
make, macros, 4-9
    examples, 4-13


                                vii
         AFLAGS, 4-11,4-14
         CFLAGS, 4-11, 4-14
         command line, 4-12
    makefile
         examples, 4-4 - 4-5, 4-20
         -£ option, 4-3
         command line, 4-10
         definition, 4-3
         dependency, 4-10
         dependency entries, 4-3 - 4-5, 4-18
         executed commands, 4-3
         libc directory, 4-21
         misc directory, 4-23
         operating system commands, 4-3
         syntax, 4-15
         sys directory, 4-22
    marking and returning, Z editor, 5-19, 5-50
    matching patterns, Z editor, 5-14
    mkarcv, make, 4-20
    modifying text, Z editor, 5-21 - 5-22
    movement, Z editor
         moving text, 5-23 - 5-25
         within C programs, 5-18
          within text, 5-8
          word movement, 5-17 - 5-18
    multiple options, grep, 3-8

N
    named buffers, Z editor
          advantage of, 5-24
          definition, 5-24
          moving text, 5-23
          yanking text, 5-24
    notation conventions, 1-2
    null character string, make, 4-11, 4-14

o
    object files, make, 4-9
         removing, 4-21


                                      viii
    operating system commands, make, 4-14
         makefile, 4-3
    operator commands, Z editor, 5-52

p
    paging commands, Z editor, 5-12
    paragraph commands, Z editor, 5-51
    path, make, 4-9
    pattern searching, Z editor, 5-14 - 5-15
    patterns, grep, 3-1
          special patterns, 3-4
          within a file, 3-2
          within multiple files, 3-2
    positioning, Z editor
          line, 5-50
          within files, 5-50
    prerequisite files, make, 4-3 - 4-4
    Professional Level, 1-1
    put commands, Z editor, 5-52

Q
    QuikFix, z editor, 5-1
         -e option, 5-6 - 5-7
        -0 option, 5-7
        :cc command, 5-36, 5-53
        :cf command, 5-36, 5-53
         :cn command, 5-36, 5-53
        :cp command, 5-36, 5-53
        :cq,5-39
         :cq command, 5-36, 5-53
        :wq command, 5-39

R
    range of lines, diff, 2-2
    reading files command, Z editor, 5-41
    redo commands, Z editor, 5-53
    regular expression, Z editor, 5-14
         definition, 5-14
         special characters, 5-14


                                       ix
          special characters list, 5-15
    replace commands, Z editor, 5-51
    replacing lines, diff, 2-2
    requirements, Z editor, 5-2
    return code, make, 4-15
    rule-processing capability, make, 4-2
    rule~make,4-2,4-12
         built-in, 4-6, 4-11, 4-14
         definition, 4-12
         makefile, 4-6
         overriding, 4-8
         sequence of commands, 4-6
         source extension, 4-6
         tab character, 4-13

5
    screen, Z editor, 5-11
          adjusting, 5-49
          display, 5-3
          scrolling, 5-7
    shift operators, Z editor, 5-26
    shifting text, Z editor, 5-26
    simple string matching, grep, 3-7
    source extension, make, 4-12
    standard input, grep, 3-3
    standard output, make,4-18
    starting, make, 4-21
    starting, Z editor, 5-38
    status information line, Z editor, 5-3
    stopping, Z editor, 5-39
    string search commands, Z editor, 5-8, 5-12 - 5-14
    substitute command, Z editor
          examples, 5-35
          options, 5-34
          syntax, 5-34

T
    tab character, make, 4-13
    tags, Z editor, 5-44


                                      x
    target extension, make, 4-12
          rules, 4-6
    target file, Z editor, 5-25
    target files, make, 4-3, 4-9
          creation, 4-17
    technical support, 1-3
    text, Z editor
          line length, 5-11
          rearranging, 5-24

u
    undo command, Z editor, 5-26, 5-53
    UNIX,5-47
         diff,2-4
         Ex-editor, 5-32
         grep, 3-7
         make, 4-1, 4-19
         Vi editor, 5-1
    unnamed buffer, Z editor, 5-23
         deleting text, 5-23
         moving text, 5-23
    unprintable characters, Z editor, 5-11

v
    Vi editor, 5-47
    volume, make, 4-9

w
    wildcard characters, grep, 3-2 - 3-3
    word movement commands, Z editor, 5-18, 5-51
    wrap scan option, Z editor, 5-13
    writing files commands, Z editor, 5-40 - 5-41

y
    yank operator command, Z editor, 5-23,5-52




                                      xi
z
    Z editor
         See also Z editor commands
         .bak files, 5-6
         accessing files, 5-39, 5-45
         adjusting the screen, 5-20, 5-49 - 5-50
         appending numbers to commands, 5-9
         autoindent, 5-5, 5-28,5-36
         character positioning, 5-51
          character strings, 5-14
          colon commands, 5-13, 5-53
          command mode, 5-6
          components, 5-3
          control keys, 5-12
          corrections during insert, 5-52
          creating new program, 5-3
          ctags, 5-3, 5-45
          cursor motion commands, 5-9, 5-18
          cursor positioning, 5-7
          definition, 1-2,5-1
          deleting lines, 5-10, 5-22
          deleting text, 5-10,5-21 - 5-22
          differences between Z and Vi, 5-47 - 5-48
          displaying unprintable characters, 5-11
          duplicating text blocks, 5-23 - 5-24
          echo commands, 5-12
          editing another file, 5-41 - 5-43
          editing existing files, 5-5
          escape key, 5-5, 5-12
          Ex-like commands, 5-32 - 5-35
          exiting, 5-5
          exiting insert mode, 5-5
          file lists, 5-43
          filenames, 5-40
          indirect macro definition, 5-31
          insert and replace, 5-51 - 5-52
          insert command list, 5-26
          insert commands, 5-10, 5-26 - 5-27
          insert mode, 5-4, 5-27
          insert mode, exiting, 5-12


                                     xii
line movement, 5-15 - 5-17
line positioning, 5-50
macro buffer, 5-28
macro wrap options, 5-32, 5-36
macros, 5-2, 5-28 - 5-32, 5-53
main text buffer, 5-23 - 5-24
making changes, 5-20
marking and returning, 5-19,5-50
matching patterns, 5-14 - 5-15
miscellaneous operations, 5-52
modifying text, 5-21 - 5-22
movement within C programs, 5-18
moving text between files, 5-24 - 5-25
moving text blocks, 5-23
moving within text, 5-8
named buffers, 5-23 - 5-25
operators, 5-52
option file, 5-36 - 5-37
options, 5-45 - 5-46, 5-49
paging, 5-12
positioning within files, 5-50
QuikFix facility, 5-1
reading files, 5-41
rearranging text, 5-24
reexecuting macros, 5-31
regular expressions, 5-14
requirements, 5-2
screen display, 5-3 - 5-4
scrolling, 5-7 - 5-8
shift operators, 5-26
shifting text, 5-26
starting, 5-6, 5-37 - 5-38, 5-49
status information line, 5-3
stopping, 5-6, 5-39
string search, 5-8, 5-12 - 5-13, 5-30
substitute command, 5-34
tags, 5-44
text lines longer than screen, 5-11
undo and redo, 5-53
undo command, 5-26


                           xiii
     UNIX vi similarities and differences, 5-47 - 5-48
     unnamed buffer, 5-23 - 5-24
     unprintable characters, 5-11
     word movement, 5-17 - 5-18
     words and paragraphs, 5-51
     wrap scan option, 5-13
     writing files, 5-40 - 5-41
     yank and put, 5-52
     yank operator, 5-23 - 5-24
     yanking text, 5-24
Z editor command options
     See also Z editor commands
     ai=1/0,5-49
     ak,5-49
     bk=1/0,5-49
     cs,5-46
     eb=1/0,5-49
     ma=0/1,5-49
     sm=1/0,5-49
      ts=val, 5-49
     wm,5-32
     wm=1/0,5-49
     ws=1/0,5-49
Z editor commands
     See also Z editor, special character commands
      :se,5-13
     a/ A, 5-10,5-26 - 5-27, 5-51
     bIB, 5-18, 5-30, 5-51
     backspace, 5-9,5-27
     c/C, 5-21 - 5-22, 5-26, 5-52
     carriage return, 5-9, 5-50
     cc,5-22
     Control L, 5-20
     Control-B,5-12
     Control-D, 5-7, 5-27
     Control-F,5-12
     Control-H,5-16
     Control-J,5-16
     Control-K,5-16
     Control-L,5-16


                                 xiv
Control-V, 5-7
Control-V, 5-27
Control-X, 5-27
diD, 5-21 - 5-22, 5-52
dd, 5-10, 5-20
dw,5-22
  examples, deleting, 5-22
e/E, 5-18, 5-51
f/F,5-17
fx/Fx, 5-51
giG, 5-8, 5-50
H,5-50
h/ AH, 5-16, 5-51
ill, 5-7, 5-26 - 5-27,5-51
J,5-52
jfAJ, 5-16,5-21,5-50
k/AK, 5-16, 5-51
L,5-50
1/ AL, 5-16, 5-51
LF,5-50
M,5-50
mx, 5-19, 5-50
n/N, 5-9, 5-13, 5-50
0/0,5-10,5-17,5-26,5-52
piP, 5-23, 5-25, 5-52
  examples, put, 5-25
R, 5-21, 5-52
rx, 5-21, 5-52
siS, 5-21, 5-27, 5-52
space, 5-9, 5-51
t/T,5-17
tabs, 5-49
tx/Tx, 5-51
u/V, 5-26, 5-53
v, 5-31,5-53
w /W, 5-17 - 5-18, 5-30, 5-51
x/X, 5-7, 5-10, 5-20 - 5-21, 5-52
y, 5-23 - 5-24, 5-52
  examples, yank operator, 5-24
z/Z, 5-20, 5-49 - 5-50


                            xv
     ZZ, 5-5 - 5-6, 5-39
Z editor memory-resident buffer, 5-7
Z editor, command line options
      -e option, 5-6 - 5-7
      -0 option, 5-7
Z editor, QuikFix facility
      See QuikFix, Z editor
Z editor, special character commands
      See also Z editor commands
      #,5-40
      $,5-15,5-17
      %,5-18,5-40
      *,5-15
      1,5-8
      <,5-15
      «,5-52
      >,5-15
      »,5-52
      ?,5-13
     @, 5-11, 5-31
    [[,5-18
    [],5-14
    ["str], 5-15
    [str],5-15
    [x-y],5-15
    \,5-40
    ]],5-18
    ",5-15,5-17
    {},5-19
     1,5-17
    -,5-11
    comma, 5-17
    double quote, 5-19, 5-25
    period, 5-15
    semicolon, 5-17
    single quote, 5-19
ZOPT environment variable, Z editor, 5-36




                               xvi
Aztec C Source Level Debugger
           for the
            Amiga
                      Version 5.0
                     October 1989




   Copyright 1988,1989 by Manx Software Systems, Inc.
                  All Rights Reserved
                      Worldwide



                  DISTRIBUTED BY:

                Manx Software Systems
                     P.O. Box 55
                Shrewsbury, NJ 07702
                   (201) 542-2121
USE RESTRICTIONS
  You are permitted to install and use this product on a single computer.
  Multiple CPU systems require supplementary licenses.
  Before using any Aztec C products, the License Registration included with
  this product must be signed and mailed to:

                           Manx Software Systems
                                P.O. Box 55
                           Shrewsbury, NJ 07702

COPYRIGHT
  This software package and document are copyrighted ©1988,1989 by Manx
  Software Systems. All rights reserved worldwide.
  No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, transcribed,
  stored in any retrieval system, or translated into any language without prior
  written permission of Manx Software Systems.

DISCLAIMER
  Manx Software Systems makes no representations or warranties with
  respect to this product and specifically disclaims any implied warranties of
  merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose. Manx Software
  Systems reserves the right to modify the programs and revise the contents
  of the manual without obligation to notify any person of such revision or
  changes.

TRADEMARKS

   Aztec C, Manx AS, Manx LN, Z, and SDB are trademarks of Manx Software
   Systems. CP IM-86 and CP IM-80 are trademarks of Digital Research.
   MSDOS is a trademark of Microsoft. PCDOS is a trademark of IBM. UNIX
   is a trademark of AT&T Bell Laboratories. Macintosh and Apple II are
   trademarks of Apple Computer. Atari is a trademark of Atari Computers.
   Amiga is a trademark of Commodore-Arniga.
Manual Revision History
       October 1989       Fifth Edition

       December 1988      Fourth Edition

       October 1988       Third Edition

       July 1988          Second Edition

       May 1988           First Edition
                                                            Table of Contents

Chapter 1 - Overview
  Introduction ........................................... 1 - 1
      REQUIREMENTS .......................................... 1 - 2
      ABOUT THIS MANUAL .................................... 1 - 2
      NOTATION CONVENTIONS ............................... 1 - 2
  Technical Support ......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1 - 3


Chapter 2 - Getting Started
  Introduction ........................................... 2 - 1
  Read the README File ............. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2 - 1
  Installation ............................................ 2 - 2
  Using the sdb Demonstration Programs .................. 2 - 3
  File Preparation ........................................ 2 - 3
  Startup ............................................... . 2 - 4
      STARTING SDB ........................................... 2 - 4
  Where To Go From Here ................................ 2 - 6


Chapter 3 - Tutorial
  Introduction ........................................... 3 - 1
      DISPLAYING SECTIONS OF THE SOURCE FILE .............. 3 - 2
      RUNNING THE PROGRAM ................................ 3 - 3
      DISPLAYING THE TRACE OF CALLS ........................ 3 - 5
      DISPLAYING VALUES AND COMPUTING EXPRESSIONS ..... 3 - 6
      WALKING UP AND DOWN THE FRAMES ................... 3 - 7
      DISPLAYING ASSEMBLY ................................... 3 - 7


Chapter 4 - Commands
  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4 - 1
      CATEGORIES ............................................. 4 - 2
        Basic ........ , ........... , .............................. 4 - 2
      NAMES ................................................... 4-3
        Code and Data Symbols .................................. 4 - 3
        Operator Usage of Names ................................ 4 - 3
      LOADING PROGRAMS AND SYMBOLS ..................... 4 - 4
      DEBUGGING LIBRARIES OR DEVICE DRIVERS .............. 4 - 4
      BREAKPOINTS ............................................ 4 - 5
      EXPRESSION BREAKPOINTS ............................... 4 - 6
      TRACE MODE ......... ~ .................................... 4 - 6
      BACKTRACING ........................................... 4 - 7
      MACROS ................................................. 4-7
      DISPLAYING SOURCE FILES ............................... 4 - 7
      ABOUT WINDOWS IN SDB ................................. 4 - 8
        Source and Data Displays ................................ 4 - 8
        Command Display ...................................... 4 - 9
        Command Line Editing .................... ; ............. 4 - 9
        Command Line History ................................. 4 - 10
        Color Control .......................................... 4 - 11
      OTHER FEATURES ....................................... 4 - 11
        Use of Control Characters in a Command File .............. 4- 12
      TERM DEFINITIONS ...................................... 4 - 13
        The Definition of expr ................................... 4 - 13
        The Definition of addr .................................. 4 - 13
        The Definition of RANGE ............................... 4 - 14



                                                     ii
     The Definition of CMDLIST ............................. 4 - 14
Detailed Description of Commands . .................... 4 -14
  AMIGA SPECIFIC COMMANDS .............. ; ........... .4 - 15
    acc Show/set command window colors .................. 4 - 15
    acd Show/set data window colors ....................... 4 - 15
    acs Show/set source windowcolors ..................... 4 - 15
  LIST DISPLAY COMMANDS ............................... 4 - 16
     add Display device list .................................. 4 - 16
     adi Display interrupt list ................................ 4- 16
     adl Display library list .................................. 4- 16
     adp Display port list .................................... 4 - 16
     adr Display resource list ................................ 4-16
     am Display memory usage .............................. 4 - 17
     ax Switch between main and alternate .dbg file ........... 4 -17
  BREAKPOINT COMMANDS ............................... 4 - 17
    bc Clear a single breakpoint ............................ 4-17
    bC Clear all breakpoints .......................... ',' ... ,4 -17
    bd Display breakpoints ................................ 4 - 18
    be Sets Expression Change Breakpoint ................... 4 - 18
    bm Sets Memory Change Breakpoint ..................... 4- 19
    br Resets breakpoint counters........................... 4 - 19
    bs Set or modify a breakpoint .......................... 4 - 20
    bt Toggle the call trace mode flag ....................... 4 - 20
    bT Toggle the source line trace mode flag ................. 4 - 20
  DISPLAY COMMANDS .................................... 4-21
     c Display Source Context ............................. 4 - 21
     da Display local addresses ............................. 4 - 21
     db Display memory in bytes ............................ 4 - 21
     dw Display memory in words ........................... 4 - 21
     dl Display memory in long words ...................... 4 - 21
     d Display memory in last format ...................... .4 - 21
     dc Display all code symbols ............................ 4 - 22


                                 iii
   dd   Display all data symbols ............................ 4 - 22
   df   Display source file lines ............................. 4 - 22
   dg   Display global values ............................... 4 - 23
   ds   Displays stack backtrace ............................ 4 - 24
   dS   Displays stack, function arguments, and auto backtrace .4 - 24
"FIND SOURCE STRING" COMMAND ..................... 4 - 24
   /  Finds string in source file ............................ 4 - 24
FRAME COMMANDS ..................................... 4 - 25
  fu Frame up command ................................ 4 - 25
  fd Frame down command ............................. 4 - 25
GO COMMANDS ......................................... 4 - 26
  g Execute the program ................................ 4 - 26
  G Execute the program, without setting table breakpoints .4 - 26
LOAD COMMANDS ...................................... 4 - 27
  ld load device symbols ................................ 4 - 27
  11 load library symbols ................................ 4 - 27
  lp load program ...................................... 4 - 27
  Loading the Program ................................... 4 - 28
  Loading the Symbol Table ............................... 4 - 28
MEMORY MODIFICATION COMMANDS ................... 4 - 28
  mb Modify bytes of memory ............................ 4 - 28
  mw Modify words of memory ........................... 4 - 28
  ml Modify long words of memory ....................... 4 - 28
  mc Compare memory .................................. 4 - 29
  mf Fill memory with value ............................. 4 - 29
  mm Move memory ..................................... 4 - 29
  ms Search memory .................................... 4 - 30
OUTPUT CONTROL COMMANDS ......................... 4 - 30
  oe Toggles command echo flag ......................... 4 - 30
  op Toggles pause flag .................................. 4 - 30
  ow Toggles switch to user screen ........................ 4 - 31
PRINT COMMAND ....................................... 4 - 31

                                iv
   p Generates formatted output ......................... 4 - 31
   desc_code List ........................................ .4 - 35
   Floating Point Number Print Codes ....................... 4 - 36
   Character Print Codes ................................... 4 - 37
   Special Purpose Codes .................................. 4 - 37
   P Command desc_codes For Setting Current Address ....... 4 - 38
QUIT COMMAND ........................................ 4 - 39
  q Quit the debugger ................................. 4 - 39
REGISTER COMMAND ................................... 4 - 40
  r   Register display ................................... 4 - 40
  Description ............................................ 4 - 40
SINGLE STEP COMMANDS            ............................. 4 - 40
   s Single steps the program n times ..................... 4 - 40
   S Single steps into calls without display ................. 4 - 40
      Single steps n times stepping over calls ............... 4 - 40
   T Single steps over calls, display last ................... 4 - 40
UNASSEMBLE COMMANDS .............................. 4 - 41
  u Unassembles memory, with symbols .................. 4 - 41
  U Unassembles memory, without symbols ............... 4 - 41
MACRO COMMANDS .................................... 4 - 42
  x Create Macro Command ............................ 4 - 42
  X Display Macro Command .......................... 4 - 42
EXPRESSION COMMANDS ................................ 4 - 43
  =  Display the value of an expression in several formats ... 4 - 43
  e Evaluate an expression ............................. 4 - 43
REDIRECT COMMAND INPUT/OUTPUT .................. 4 - 43
  < Redirect command input ........................... 4 - 43
  > Log alll/O only .................................. 4 - 43
  » Log commands only .............................. 4 - 43
HELP COMMAND ........................................ 4 - 44
  ?   List command ..................................... 4 - 44



                                v
  CHANGE MODE COMMAND ............................. 4 - 44
    z Change mode command ............................ 4 - 44
  DELAY COMMAND ...................................... 4 - 45
    & Delay sdb ......................................... 4 -45

Command Summary . .................................. 4 - 46
  AMIGA SPECIFIC COMMANDS ........................... 4 - 46
  BREAKPOINT COMMANDS ............................... 4 - 46
  DISPLAY COMMANDS .................................... 4 - 46
  FIND SOURCE STRING COMMAND ....................... 4 - 47
  CHANGE FRAME COMMANDS ........................... 4 - 47
  GO COMMAND .......................................... 4 - 47
  LOAD COMMAND ....................................... 4 - 47
  MEMORY MODIFICATION COMMANDS ................... 4 - 47
  OUTPUT CONTROL COMMANDS ........................ .4 - 47
  FORMATTED PRINT COMMAND .......................... 4 - 47
  QUIT COMMAND ........................................ 4 - 47
  REGISTER COMMAND ................................... 4 - 48
  SINGLE STEP COMMANDS ............................... 4 - 48
  UNASSEMBLY COMMANDS .............................. 4 - 48
  MACRO COMMANDS .................................... 4 - 48
  EXPRESSION COMMANDS ................................ 4 - 48
  REDIRECT COMMAND INPUT ............................ 4 - 48
  HELP COMMAND ........................................ 4 - 48
  CHANGE MODE COMMAND ............................. 4 - 48
  DELAY COMMAND ...................................... 4 - 48




                              vi
                   OVERVIEW




Chapter 1 - Overview
Introduction
  Manx sdb is a fast, easy to use, interacitve source level debugger. You will
  appreciate the simplicity of working with sdb. If you are an experienced
  programmer, you will recognize the time and effort you save debugging
  with sdb.
  Use sdb to debug programs created with the Aztec C Compiler. The
  windows in sdb display C source and command output separately, with a
  third window for entering commands.
  With sdb, you can ...
        .. .debug programs at the C source and assembly
              language levels
        ... display all active function names
        ... display values of passed parameters
        ...examine variables from any active function
        ... use function or line-by-line tracing
        ...set breakpoints by lines, functions, or variables
        ...see actual C source as it executes
        .. .customize the debugging environment with
              reusable command macros and procedures
        ...and more!
                    Aztec C Source Level Debugger



REQUIREMENTS
  Manx recommends a minimum of 256K bytes of available RAM memory
  for use with sdb; the debugger uses about 180K. sdb runs under the CLI.
  sdb can be used on 68000, 68010, 68020, and 68030 systems.

ABOUT THIS MANUAL
  This manual describes how to use the Source Level Debugger and is
  designed to be used primarily as a reference. Though this manual does
  include a brief tutorial, the best way to learn, in depth, how to use sdb is to
  work through the demonstration programs that have been included on
  your sdb disk. See the readme file or Chapter 2 of this manual for instruc-
  tions on how to execute the demonstration programs.
  Throughout this manual, we assume that you already have a basic under-
  standing of how to use Aztec C. If you need additional technical informa-
  tion about using Aztec C, refer to your Aztec C documentation.
  This manual is divided into the following sections:
         Introduction         Describes the requirements and features of sdb.

         Getting Started      Gives the procedures necessary to install sdb,
                              start up sdb, and run the sdb demonstration
                              program.

         Tutorial             Gives easy-to-follow directions for using sdb.

         Commands             Describes the features of sdb and how to use
                              them. Defines some sdb terms and describes
                              the sdb commands in detail. Includes a com-
                              mand summary for easy reference.

NOTATION CONVENTIONS
  Throughout this manual, we use the following conventions:
         input              to indicate data entered by the user (e.g., com-
                            mands, options, and functions)
                                                Overview



        output            to show text that is generated by the computer

        DEFINITION        small uppercase bold is used on terms that may
                          be new to the user; most likely will include ex-
                          planation or definition of term

        {choicell choice2} braces and a vertical bar mean that you have a
                           choice between two or more items

        placeholders      information that must be supplied by the user,
                          for example, filename, range, identifier, etc.

        [optional]        to show optional information

Technical Support
  At Manx, we build dependability into our products. However, if you should
  find that you need help, rest assured that we provide it.
  Refer to your Aztec C User Guide for information on the Technical Support
  that Manx provides. If you have any problems with sdb, follow the proce-
  dures outlined in Technical Information chapter so that we may best be
  able to assist you.
          GETTING STARTED




Chapter 2 - Getting Started
Introduction
  This chapter takes you through the steps necessary for getting started with
  sdb. Before you begin using sdb, you should:

     • Read the readme file.

     • Install sdb, as described in the Installation section of this chap-
       ter, on your hard drive OR create an sdb "work diskette"

     • Run the sdb demonstration programs that have been included
       on your disk.

     • Prepare your files for debugging.

     • Startup sdb.

  This chapter describes each of these procedures in detail.

Read the README File
  If there is a readme file on your sdb disk, you can access it by entering "type
  readme" from the CLI. The readme documents provide information that
                        Aztec C Source Level Debugger



  may not be in the manual or may be more recent than information in the
  manual.
  If you want to send the readme document to the printer, use the command:
         type    > PRT:     readme


Installation
  Once you have verified that your files are complete, you should load sdb
  onto your hard disk or create a working floppy disk.
  To load sdb onto your hard disk:
       1. Tum on your machine and enter the CLI.
       2. Insert your sdb disk into your floppy drive. Change directory to
       your hard disk's bin directory. Copy the file sdb into your bin direc-
       tory using the command:
             copy dfO:sdb sdb
       3. Change directory back to the root directory of your hard disk. Crea te
       a scratch directory and load the sdb examples into the scratch direc-
       tory.
   To create an sdb "work disk":
       1. Tum on your machine and enter the CLI. Do not boot off of your
       Aztec C disk, as it does not give you access to CLI.
       2. With the sdb master in drive zero, insert your work disk into drive
       one.
       3. Copy the contents of your SDB disk to the work disk using the
       command
            diskcopy dfO: dfl:
   Once you have run through the tutorial and the examples, you may delete
   all but the sdb file from your work disk. You do not need any other files
   from the disk in order to use sdb.
                                      Started



Using the sdb Demonstration Programs
  As explained in Chapter 1, the Overview, the best way to learn how to use
  sdb is to work through the demonstration programs that have been in-
  cluded on your sdb disk. After you have worked through the demonstra-
  tion programs, you should also read the written tutorial, Chapter 3, which
  is included in this manual.
  To start the demonstration, boot your machine into CLI. Do not boot from
  the SDB disk, as it does not make CLI available to you. As explained above,
  under "Read the readme File", it is a good idea to print out the readme file
  before beginning work. To begin the demonstration, change directory to the
  demo directory by typing:
     cd demo
  Then, simply type demo. After making sure that you want to proceed, the
  demonstration will "walk you through" the basics of using sdb. For a
  complete understanding of the power and flexibility available with sdb,
  you should work through each of the demonstrations included.

File Preparation
   sdb works on executable files. To use sdb, however, you must create a
  debug file as well. The following steps will show you how this is done:
       1. Create a C source file.
       2. Compile using the -bs option, as shown:
            cc -bs fi1ename.c
       3. Link using the -g option, as shown:
            1n -g fi1ename.o -lc
       You will now have two files: an executable file and a debug file. The
       debug file will have the extension .dbg.

  Note: To use sdb, you must have version 3.6 or higher of Aztec C.
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger



Startup
  You can start sdb in one of two ways:
       1. From the CLI, by typing
               selli filename
       2. From the CLI by invoking sdb and then using the Ip command to
       load the program. (See the section on the Ip command in the Com-
       mands chapter.)
  The following sections discuss these startup methods.

STARTING SOS
  When you start sdb from the CLI, as shown in step 1 above, you may also
  specify certain options and parameters, in the form of:
     sdb [options] filename [parameters]
  where
   [options] are anyone of the following:
          -a                starts sdb in assembly mode (default is C source
                            mode; see z command in the Commands chap-
                            ter.)

          -eco,t,b,p        set command area colors(o=outline,t= text,
                            b=background,p=prompt). For each letter in the-
                            ee, -cd, and -es options, enter one of the num-
                            bers 0 through 3 to select one of the four
                            workbench colors.

          -edt,b            set the data area display (t=text and b= back-
                            ground)

          -est,b,ht,bt.     set the source display colors (t=text, b=back-
                            ground, ht= highlighted text, and bt=high-
                            lighted background)
                             Ge       Started


       -cwl,t,w,h         controls the positioning and size of the sdb win-
                          dow. All four numbers must be present; they
                          determine (in order) left edge, top edge, width,
                          and height.

       -d#                 specifies data window buffer size with valid
                           range of 512 < # < 32000 (default is 4096 bytes).

       -e                  toggles echoing of commands to the data win-
                           dow (see the oe command in the Commands
                           chapter.)

       -hI                 specifies history window buffer size with valid
                           range of 128 < # < 10240 (default is 512 bytes).

       -mfile              forces redirection to an input file

       -n                  does not look for file.mac

       -p                  sets prompt for -w mode

       -r                  use this option if the program being debugged
                           has been made resident using the REZ utility.

       -spath              path is a string to be prefixed to source files
                           upon opening

       -w                  disables the windowing part of the debugger
                           display

and [parameters], like argl, arg2, ..., are character strings to be passed to the
program. When invoked, sdb loads the program to be debugged, starts it,
and then stops at the entry point to the main function displaying that line.
The startup options can be changed and made somewhat permanent by
setting the environment variable SDBOPT to the appropriate values. For
example, to preset the colors for the three windows, enter the following:
   set "SDBOPT=-csl,3,2,O              -cd3,2      -ccO,O,1,2"
                         Aztec C Source Level Deb



  If the program filename specifies a drive or directory, sdb searches for the
  program file in only that particular area. Otherwise, it searches the current
  directory on the default drive.
  Arguments are passed to the program using the argv parameters of the
  program's main function: arg1 is pointed at by argv [1] , arg2 argv [2],
  and so on. argv [0] contains the name of the program.
  -spath creates the fpath macro, which tells sdb to look for source files in a
  sequence of directories. By default, sdb looks in the current directory. If you
  do not specify another directory or subdirectory, sdb assumes the current
  directory should be searched. However, you may prefer to separate your
  executable files from your source files. Therefore, sdb searches multiple
  directories as long as you specify the directories or subdirectories on the
  command line, separated by a ";" or "!". For example,
       -sdir1;vol:dir2; ...
  or
       -sdir1!vol:dir2! ...
  You may also invoke sdb by typing sdb with no arguments. You must use
  the lp command to load the program you want to debug.

Where To Go From Here
  Now that you have worked through the steps necessary for getting started
  with sdb, you should go on to the Tutorial, Chapter 3.
                   TUTORIAL




Chapter 3 - Tutorial
Introduction
  This tutorial introduces you to the Source Level Debugger. As explained in
  the previous chapter, sdb works on executable files. To use sdb, however,
  you must create a debug file as well. Refer to the File Preparation section
  of Chapter 2, Getting Started, for instructions on how this is done.
  With this tutorial, we will assume that you already have a basic under-
  standing of the Aztec C software development system and how it is used.
  If you have any questions about using Aztec C, refer to your Aztec C
  documentation.
  When using the debugger, you should make use of the help screens, which
  can be obtained by entering
     ?
  Further detail is provided for many of the commands by entering the first
  letter of the command followed by a question mark. For example, typing
     f?

  will display information on the commands £u and £d.
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger



  To begin this session, you must invoke sdb. Refer to the Startup section of
  Chapter 2, Getting Started, for instructions on how this is done. As ex-
  plained in that section, you may enter sdb from the CLI.
  When invoked, sdb loads the program to be debugged, starts it, and then
  stops at the entry point to the main function, displaying that line.

DISPLAYING SECTIONS OF THE SOURCE FILE
  Two commands, c and df, are provided for displaying your source file.
  c is used to display the current source line. It takes no arguments.
  df can be used to display lines other than the current source line. The format
  of the df command is:
     df    [filename] range
  where filename is the name of the file to be displayed and range is the line
  number that will be displayed at the beginning of the source window. Note
  that filename is optional and defaults to the current file if none is specified.
  range is one of the following:
     line
     line ... line
     line,count
  line and count are expressions yielding an integer result. If line is specified
  alone, the line indicated is displayed at the beginning of the source window.
  The c command is very useful if you have used df to display another file
  or have scrolled out of the source window. If this is the case, then typing
     c
  will bring you back to your currrent file at the current line.
  As with all display commands, pressing <CR> after issuing the command
  causes the next set of lines of source to be displayed.
                                   Tutorial



RUNNING THE PROGRAM
  Once the program is loaded, debugging consists of setting breakpoints and
  running the program. Breakpoints can be one-time breakpoints or can be
  set as permanent breakpoints.
  If you do not wish to set permanent breakpoints, you can control execution
  of the program using the single step and go commands.
  The format of a single step command is:
     [count]s
     [count]S
     [count]t

     [counflT



  where count is a positive integer that causes the debugger to single step
  count times, printing information for each breakpoint before stopping.
  If count is zero, single stepping is performed until a breakpoint is hit, an
  error occurs, or the program finishes.
  The difference between sand t is that s single steps into calls while t single
  steps across calls. In effect, t treats a call as a single line.
  Sand T step count times, displaying information only for the last breakpoint
  taken. S steps into calls just like s while T treats calls as a single line.
  In source level mode (the default), single step is by source line. In assembly
  mode, (set by typing z<CR>) single step is by machine code instruction.

  If single stepping encounters a function for which no source line informa-
  tion is available (a library function for example), single stepping into the
  function causes the debugger to step over the call just as it would with t.
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger



To set a permanent breakpoint, type:
   [count]bs addr[;commandl
where count is an integer expression, addr is:
        [filename].line
        function[.line]
        addressexpression
and command is a set of debugger commands separated by semicolons.
For example, you can enter:
   bs linkmain.c.39
This sets a breakpoint on line 39 of linkmain. c. Alternatively,
   bs getfld.10
sets a breakpoint at line 10 in the function getfld.
   bs getfld+10
sets a breakpoint at 10 bytes beyond the start of getfld. Entering
   bs .10
will set the breakpoint at line 10 in the file currently being displayed.
Finally, to make the program go, you simply type g<CR>. The program
executes until it encounters a breakpoint or terminates.
The format of the go command is:
   g [@] [addr]
where @ means "go until a return after addr is found" and addr is as
described above. addr is set as a temporary breakpoint and will not be
remembered after execution of the command.
For example:
   g @

means go until the current function returns. And
                                   Tutorial



     g linkmain.c.39
  means go to line 39 in linkmain. c

DISPLAYING THE TRACE OF CALLS
  It is often useful to know where the program is in a set of nested calls and
  what the arguments and local variables are to each of the calls. To display
  the nested stack of calls in sdb, simply type
     ds
  Each of the calls currently active is displayed, together with its arguments;
  each argument is displayed in a form appropriate to its type.
  Type
     dS
  and the functions are displayed with the types, names, and values of each
  function argument, and auto variables.
  For example:
     ds
  might cause the following display

     _main(int argc=l, char ** argv = OxOOe051B8)
       main (OxOOOO, Ox0002, oxooeo, Ox5040
     .begin ()
  while
     dS

  could cause:

     _main(int argc          1, char **argv           Oxooe051B8)
       int i = 0
       long j = -1
       char name[8]           "hello."
     _main ()
     .begin
                            Aztec C Source Level Debugger



DISPLAYING VALUES AND COMPUTING EXPRESSIONS
  sdb provides some simple but powerful facilities for displaying variables,
  arrays, and structures. These are the p (print) and the e (evaluate) com-
  mands. For example, to print a structure named symbol, you simply enter:
     p symbol


  which might result in:

     struct symboltb symbol =
        int s_flag = 10
        char *s name = OxFF42
        int s_value[2] = {
          10,5



  Suppose then you want to display the string pointed to by sym-
  bol. s_name. You simply type:
     ps *symbol.s_name
  The s following the p command indicates that you are overriding the
  default format for pointer to char and the s indicates that the new format
  is string.
  So the result might be:

     pointer

  In addition to the print command, the debugger has an evaluate command
  so that you can perform general C expression evaluation, including calls to
  C functions, assignment, pre- and post-increment and decrement, casts, and
  condi tiona Is.
     e c   = getchar ()
                                    Tutorial



  might result in:
     =10



WALKING UP AND DOWN THE FRAMES
  In using the expressions shown above, you are generally limited to referring
  to variables that are visible by C rules at the point where execution stopped.
  Therefore, you cannot refer to local variables or functions that are not active
  or are not the "current" function. (Statics, however, may be referred to by
  qualifying them with the name of the file or function they were declared in,
  e.g. linkmain . C • name or main. name . )
  In order to refer to names in other active functions, you can change sdb's
  notion of what the current function is by walking up and down the call
  frames, using the commands fu for frame up, and fd for frame down. These
  commands walk up the call frames, displaying the line from which the next
  frame down was called and making visible all of the current call's local
  variables.

DISPLAYING ASSEMBLY
  Finally, you can display the assembly code at any address with the unas-
  semble command. Its format is:
     uaddr
     U addr

  where addr is as described above.
  u does a disassembly with symbols substituted where possible for global
  and local variables. U disassembles without symbol substitution but with
  the hex for the code shown as well as the assembly.
                  COMMANDS



Chapter 4 - Commands
Overview
   sdb commands consist of one, two, or three characters. The first identifies
   the command category and the second and third identify the specific
   operation to be performed. If the command name contains only one char-
   acter, it is the only command in a category.
   If you are using Motorola Fast Floating Point, use sdbf. sdbf is identical to
   sdb except for the support of Motorola fast float.
   This chapter contains the following:
        Categories               describes the general command categories

        Detailed Description     describes how to use sdb and sdbf com-
                                 mands in detail

        Command Summary          lists the commands with a brief description.


CATEGORIES

Basic
    sdb has two types of commands for examining memory: display (d) and
   print (p). The display commands db, dw, and dl simply display
   hexadecimal bytes, words, and long words, respectively.
                     Aztec C Source Level Debugger



The print command, p, is more powerful, allowing you to print variables,
arrays, and structures by name without having to worry about data types.
For example, you can tell sdb to print a structure whose name is symbol
by typing
   p symbol
sdb figures out the data types and prints the structure and its members in
the proper format. You can also display strings that are pointed to by a
structure member using the p command.
The evaluate command, e, allows you to perform general C expression
evaluation, including calls to C functions, assignment, pre- and post-incre-
ment and decrement, casts, and conditionals.
The register command, r, displays and modifies the 68000 registers.
The frame commands, i, allow you to walk up and down the call frame.
The memory modify commands, m, allow you to modify memory.
The unassemble commands, u, display code symbolicall,Yt in a form similar
to its appearance in an assembly language source file.
The s, t, and g commands cause your program to be executed. sand t
commands "single step" through your program, e.g., they execute a
specified number of instructions in your program and then return control
to sdb.
 The g commands transfer control of the processor unconditionally to your
program. In this case, sdb regains control when your program terminates,
when an error occurs (such as division by zero), or when a "breakpoint" is
taken. (Breakpoints are described in more detail later in this chapter.)
The help command, ?, displays a summary of all sdb commands. For some
command categories, you can get information about the commands in a
category by typing the first letter of the category followed by a ? For
example, type
   m?
to get information about the memory modification commands (all of which
contain a first letter m).
                              SOB Commands



NAMES
    sdb allows memory locations to be referenced by name as well as by
   location. It learns a program's variable names by reading the file containing
   the program symbol table.
   The Linker generates a symbol table file for a program in response to option
   -g. There are various ways for sdb to read the symbol table and these are
   described below.
   sdb allows global symbols, automatic variables, static variables, arrays, and
   structures to be accessed by name.

Code and Data Symbols
    sdb classifies symbols as being either code or data symbols, e.g., they refer
   to a location in a physical code segment or a physical data segment.
   There are two commands for viewing the symbols that are known to sdb:
   de and dd, which display code and data symbols, respectively.

Operator Usage of Names
   When a C source program is compiled, all global symbols are truncated to
   a maximum of 31 characters and are then prepended with an underscore
   character.
   To refer to symbols which, in a C source file, contain less than 31 characters,
   the inclusion of the prepended underscore character is optional. If it is
   specified, sdb searches for that symbol in its symbol table. Otherwise, it
   first searches for the specified symbol. If the search fails, it prepends an
   underscore to the name and searches again. To refer to symbols that contain
   32 or more characters, only the first 31 are significant. sdb ignores all other
   characters in the name.

LOADING PROGRAMS AND SYMBOLS
   A program and its symbols can be loaded into memory when sdb is started.
   In this case, the command line defines the program to be loaded.
   The sdb load program command, Ip, can also be used. If sdb is started
   with a program name specified on the command line, the Ip command can
                        Aztec C Source Level Dph'll<YCtPT



LOADING PROGRAMS AND SYMBOLS
  A program and its symbols can be loaded into memory when sdb is started.
  In this case, the command line defines the program to be loaded.
  The sdb load program command, Ip, can also be used. If sdb is started
  with a program name sp.~cified on the command line, the lp command can
  be used to reload the same program for another debugging session. If sdb
  is started without specifying a program name, the lp command must be
  issued with the desired program name. Only one user program can be in
  memory at once. When told to load a program, sdb automatically tries to
  load the program symbol table too. It assumes the symbol table file has the
  same name as the program file, with the extension changed to .dbg.
  When a program exits, it must be reloaded with the Ip command before
  execution can begin again.

DEBUGGING LIBRARIES OR DEVICE DRIVERS
  Because a library or device driver is not "run" in the same way as a program,
  sdb contains special support to enable these to be debugged at the source
  level. First, they must be compiled with option -bs and linked with option
  -g.
  Then the binary generalted by the linker should be placed in the libs:
  directory while the .dbg file should be in the source directory. Next the
  program that will make calls to the library or device must also be compiled
  and linked to generate source level information.
  Now, sdb should be invoked on the test program. When the program is
  loaded, it should be run far enough so that the appropriate library or device
  is in memory. Use the adl or add command to verify this. Then the 11 or Id
  command should be used with the appropriate library or device name as
  in:
          1.1. my1.ib
  or
          1.d mydev
                             SDB Commands



BREAKPOINTS
  Before transferring control of the processor to your program in response to
  a g command, sdb can set BREAKPOINTS at specified locations in the code.
  When your program reaches a breakpoint, sdb regains con trol.
  A breakpoint has a skip count associated with it that allows it to be passed
  several times before actually taking the breakpoint and returning control
  to sdb and the user. When a breakpoint is reached, sdb is always activated.
  It increments a counter associated with the breakpoint. When the counter's
  value is greater than the breakpoint's skip count, the breakpoint is taken.
  For example, sdb retains control of the processor. Otherwise, sdb returns
  control of the processor to your program after the breakpoint. By default, a
  breakpoint's skip count is O. Thus, each time the breakpoint is reached, it is
  taken.
  A breakpoint can also have a sequence of sdb commands associated with
  it. When a breakpoint is taken, these commands are executed before sdb
  allows you to enter commands. For example, if you want only to examine
  a variable each time a certain location in the code is reached and then have
  the program continue execution, you could define a breakpoint at the
  location and specify a list of commands to do just that. The first command
  in the sequence would be a d command to display memory, and the second
  would be a g command to continue execution of the program.
  There are two ways to define breakpoints: with the g command and with
  special breakpoint commands, whose first letter is b.
  The breakpoint commands manipulate a table of breakpoints: There are
  commands for entering breakpoints into the table, displaying the entries,
  resetting their counters, and removing them from the table.
  There is a difference between a breakpoint defined in a g command and
  those in the breakpoint table: The g command breakpoint is temporary,
  while a breakpoint table is more permanent (it exists until removed from
  the table). Before transferring control to your program in response to a g
  command, sdb sets all breakpoints that are in the breakpoint table and that
  are specified in the g command itself. When a breakpoint is taken, sdb
  removes all breakpoints from the code and forgets all about the g command
  breakpoint. The breakpoint table breakpoints, however, are still in the table
  and will be set back in memory when control is again returned to your
  program.
                        Aztec C Source Level


    sdb remembers the skip counter associated with a breakpoint in the
  breakpoint table. When it sets breakpoints in memory, the count for such a
  breakpoint is set to its remembered value <e.g., its value in the table). When
  a breakpoint is taken, the accumulated count for the breakpoints in memory
  is saved in the breakpoint table.

EXPRESSION BREAKPOINTS
  The breakpoints described above are taken when a program reaches a
  specified point in the code. A second type of breakpoint, called an expres-
  sion breakpoint, is taken when a specified expression evaluates as true.
  With an expression breakpoint set, sdb detects the instruction that causes
  the specified expression to evaluate as true, assuming your program is
  being single stepped using an s command.
  When an s command is used to single step a program and an expression
  breakpoint is set, sdb evaluates the specified expression after each instruc-
  tion is executed and takes a breakpoint when appropriate.
  The be command is used to set and remove expression breakpoints.

TRACE MODE
   sdb supports two trace modes that display information whenever a
  function is entered or exited or when a source line is passed.
  With the first mode enabled upon entry to, and exit from, a function, the
  function name, its arguments, and return values are displayed.
  The commands bt and bT affect trace mode: bt enables and disables call
  trace mode, and bT enables and disables source line trace mode.

BACKTRACING
  When sdb regains control from an executing program (for example, be-
  cause a breakpoint was taken), it has the ability to display information on
  how the program got to its current location: The ds and dS commands
  display information about the currently executing function, and the func-
                             SDn Commands



  tion that called it, and so on, back to the Manx function _mainO, which
  called your function mainO.
  For each function, ds displays its name, arguments that were passed to it,
  and the address to which it will return. dS displays the function's automa tic
  variables as well.


MACROS
   sdb allows you to define and execute macros, e.g., a sequence of sdb
  commands.
  Macros are written to a file that is saved so that macros can be reused in a
  subsequent session. The filename for the saved macros is derived by taking
  the program name and appending a .mac. The sdb command x is used both
  to define and execute a macro.

DISPLAYING SOURCE FILES
  Since sdb is a source level debugger, it allows you to display source files,
  thus providing a convenient means to examine the source of a program
  being debugged.
  Only a single source file can be examined at a time. The display source
  command, df ,and the context command, c, can be used to display its lines.
  The find string command, I, finds a character string in the source file.

ABOUT WINDOWS IN SOB
   sdb provides a single independent window created in the Workbench
  screen. The title on the window is "Aztec SDB:", followed by the name of
  the source file being displayed and the current function name in which the
  debugger has stopped.
  Within this window are three independent display areas: a source area, a
  command area, and a data area. The entire window can be resized using
  the sizing icon located in the lower right comer of the window. The
  minimum size guarantees two source lines, the command line, and three
                         Aztec C Source Level Debugger



   data lines. Lines that are too long to fit within the source or data displays
   are truncated, which is indicated by a $ character in the last column.

Source and Data Displays
   Both the source and data areas operate similarly. Each can be considered to
   be a window containing text or data from a larger set of text or data. The
   position of this window on the larger set is controlled by an icon at the right
   side of the display. This gadget consists of a rectangle with a smaller square
   within it, bordered at the top and the bottom with two arrows pointing up
   and down, respectively. The arrows are used for fine adjustments of the
   display, while the squares are used for larger adjustments.
   The outer rectangle of the gadget represents the total amount of text or data
   that can be displayed. The inner square, by its position, represents the
   position of the displayed text within the total. To reposition the window,
   move the mouse pointer over the scroll box and move the inner square up
   or down, while holding down the mouse button. As the square is moved,
   the display will be updated with the contents appropriate to the new
   position. When the desired position is reached, release the mouse button.
   To move the display only one display's worth at a time, point the mouse
   either above or below the inner square but within the outer rectangle. Now,
   each mouse click will move the display up or down by the number of lines
   within the display.
   To move the display one line at a time, point the mouse at one of the two
   arrows and click the mouse button. The display scrolls for each click of the
   mouse button. It scrolls continuously if you hold the mouse button down.
   The displays may also be scrolled using the UP and DOWN cursor keys on
   the keyboard. To move the source display, hold down either SHIFT key
   while pressing the UP or DOWN cursor keys. The data display is similarly
   controlled by using the ALT key instead of the SHIFT key.
   The source display is a window on the CUlTent text file. The data display is
   a circular buffer of 2000 characters. As lines are added to the end of the
   display, lines are removed from the beginning of the display. Because the
   buffer is character based,. the display can show a few long lines, many short
   lines, or something in between.
                              SOB Commands



Command Display
   The command display is a single line display that consists of a CMO?
   prompt, an editing area, and a small UP/DOWN gadget to the extreme
   right.
   The UP /OOWN gadget is used to position the command display within
   the sdb window. When the mouse is pointed at the gadget and the button
   is held down, an outline of the command area is displayed that follows the
   position of the mouse pointer. When the button is released, the command
   line is moved to the new position. This automatically causes the sizes of the
   source and data displays to be adjusted, and their contents and controls are
   redisplayed to reflect the new sizes.
   The command display can also be moved by holding down the SHIFT and
   ALT keys simultaneously while pressing the UP and DOWN arrow keys.

Command Line Editing
   When the command display is awaiting input, a block cursor is displayed
   within the editing area of the command display. At this point, characters
   may be typed into the display area using the keyboard. As each key is typed,
   it is inserted and the cursor moves to the right. When the BACKSPACE key
   is pressed, the cursor moves left one character and that character is deleted.
   A line can be up to 128 characters in length. If the line exceeds the width of
   the display, it will automatically scroll to the left as characters are added.
   When a line is finished, pressing the return key causes the line to be parsed
   and executed by sdb.
   In addition to the BACKSPACE key, there are a number of editing features
   that are available within the command display. First, there are a number of
   ways to change the cursor position. Use the LEFT and RIGHT arrows to
   move the cursor one character position in the corresponding direction.
   Hold down either SHIFT key and press the LEFT or RIGHT arrow key to
   move the cursor to the beginning or end of the line. And point the mouse
   anywhere in the line and press the mouse button to move the cursor to that
   spot.
   Once the cursor is positioned, characters can be deleted at the current
   position by using the DEL key. New characters can be inserted by simply
   typing them. Space is made for each character as it is typed.
                          Aztec C Source Level



   If instead of inserting characters, the new characters are to replace the
   existing characters, press ESC, to switch from insert mode to replace mode.
   Press ESC again to switch back to insert mode.

Command Line History
   When the RETURN key is pressed to signal the end of an input line, the line
   is added to the end of a 512-byte buffer. Longer lines mean fewer lines in
   the buffer, while shorter lines mean more lines in the buffer.
   When a line is to be added to the buffer, it is first searched to see if the same
   exact line already exists in the buffer. If not, then the new line is simply
   added to the end and lines from the beginning are removed to make space.
   If it is found, the old Hne is simply moved to the end of the buffer after
   moving all the intervening lines. In this case, no lines are removed from the
   beginning. This is done so that simply typing 5 followed by RETURN a
   hundred times while stepping through a program will not flush all the old
   lines out of the buffer.
   For each press of the UP key, the command line shows the previous line in
   the history buffer. When the desired line is found, it can be entered by
   pressing RETURN immediately or it can be edited as discussed in the
   previous section.
   Use these additional character key sequences to move as follows:
        FlO       to swap screens between your program and sdb
        ESC       to toggle insert versus overstrike mode
        CTRL-C to terminate output
        CTRL-X to clear the command line

Color Control
   Since the sdb window is created in the Workbench screen, sdb is limited to
   the four Workbench colors selected using the Preferences program. How-
   ever, there is full control of the colors used within each display area. The
   Workbench colors are referred to by numbers 0 to 3. These correspond to
   the four colors displayed in order by the Preferences program.
                              SOB Commands



  The data display has the simplest choice of colors, namely the color used
  to display text and the color of the background. The default is 1,2 or text set
  to color 1 and background set to color 2.
  The source display has four choices of colors. The first two correspond to
  the color and background of text similar to the data display. The second two
  correspond to the color and background of highlighted text. Highlighted
  text is used to show the current position of the program within the file. The
  default is 1,0,1,3 or text set to color 1, background set to color 0, highlighted
  text set to color 1 and highlighted background set to color 3. To display
  highlighted text as the inverse of regular text, simply reverse the text and
  background values as in 1,0,0,1.
  Finally, the command display area has four choices. Just like the source and
  data displays, the text and background can be chosen. In addition, the text
  color of the CMD? prompt can be chosen as well as the color of the outline
  of the command area. The outline consists of a one pixel high line above
  and below the command area. The default is 1,1,0,1 or an outline in color
  1, text in color 1 with a background of color 0, and the prompt set to color
  1 as well.
  The display colors can be examined and changed by using the ae commands
  in sdb. In addition, the colors can also be set using the -es, -ee, and -cd
  options to sdb. To make the changes somewhat automatic, the environment
  variable SDBOPT is scanned for arguments in addition to those used to
  invoke sdb.

OTHER FEATURES
    Some other features of sdb that have not yet been discussed are:

     • redirect stdin command, <, causes sdb to read commands from a
       specified device or file and then continue reading commands
       from the console. Log commands, >, and », allow the logging
       of either all I/O or the commands only to a separate file.

     • evaluate expression command, =, evaluates an expression.

     • help command, ?, lists commands with a brief description of
       each.
                          Aztec C Source Level



Use of Control Characters In a Command File
   Most of the keyboard commands have control character equivalents. These
   may be used directly from keyboards that support the use of control
   characters, but their primary use is for command files. This can be seen in
   the command file scripts used to run the sdb demos found on your disk.
   The following are the control characters and their keyboard equivalents.
   Control      Keyboard Sequence           Action Performed
   Character
   AK           uparrow                      scroll back in history buffer
   AD           down arrow                   scroll forward in history buffer
   AG           left arrow                  move cursor left
   AL           right arrow                 move cursor right
   AT           shift - up arrow             scroll C source down
   AU            shift - down arrow          scroll C source up
   AV            shift - left arrow          move cursor to far left
   AW            shift - right arrow         move cursor to far right
   AN            ALT - up arrow              scroll data down
   AD            ALT - down arrow            scroll data up
   A[            FlO                         view application screen
   Ay            ESC                         toggle between Insert and
                                             Replace mode

TERM DEFINITIONS
   This section defines some terms that are used in the command descriptions.
   These terms are expr, tenn, addr, range, and cmdlist.

The Definition of expr
   An expr is any valid C expression.
                                SDB Commands


   For example, an expr can consist of a single tenn, a series of tenns separated
   by operators, the use of registers by their standard names, or 32-bit values
   representing memory locations.
   Here is an example of expr:
      si
      x + 2.0
      (i = j) ? 2           3
      OxCOB54
      sin (y)
      array[j]


The Definition of addr
   An addr is the name of a C variable, an address constant, or a C expression
   that yields an address. Examples of an addr are as follows:

        linkmain . c . 19 address of the code corresponding to line 19 of
                          linkmain.c

        .19                  same as above if current file is linkmain . c

        main                 address of main

        Ox1532               an address at Ox1532

        token [j]            address of j th element of array token

The Definition of RANGE
   A range defines a block of memory. It has one of the following forms:

        addr,cnt
        addr to addr          (the word lito" must be included)
        addr
        ,cnt
   The form addr,ent specifies the starting address, addr, and a number, ent. ent
   is interpreted differently by different commands. For example, the disas-
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger



   semble code command, u, displays cnt lines, while the display bytes com-
   mand, sdb, displays cnt bytes.
   The form addr to addr specifies the starting and ending addresses of the
   range. A full range need not be explicitly specified, because sdb remembers
   the last-used range and sets unspecified RANGE parameters from the
   remembered values:

      • When a range is specified that consists of a single addr, the last
        used cnt is used.

      • When a range is specified that consists of ,cnt, the next consecu-
        tive address is used, and the remembered count is changed to
        the new value.

      • When nothing is specified as the range, the next consecutive ad-
        dress is used as the starting addr, and the cnt is set to the remem-
        bered value.

The Definition of CMDLlST
   A cmdlist is a list of commands. It consists of a sequence of commands or
   macros separated by semicolons:
      command [;command •..]

   If a macro is in a cmd lis t it must be the las.t command in the list.
                             J,




Detailed Descripticln of Commands
   The commands are listed alphabetically within categories.
                               son Commands


AMIGA SPECIFIC COMMANDS

>- ace             Show / set command window colors
>- acd             Show / set data window colors
>- acs             Show / set source windowcolors

Syntax
         acc   [out, text, back, prompt]
         acd   [text, back]
         acs   [text, back, high, back]

Description
   The acc, acd, and acs commands control the color for the command data
   and source displays, respectively. See the Overview section of this manual
   for a detailed description of "windows" and "color codes." Because sdb is
   created in the Workbench screen, it is limited to the four Workbench colors
   selected using the Preferences program. Choose the four Workbench colors
   by referencing numbers 0 through 3.
   acc: You have four color choices for the command display-text, back-
   ground, prompt text, and command area outline. The default values are:
         1,1,0,1
   where

          Outline        Color 1
          Text           Color 1
          Background     Color 0
          Prompt Text    Color 1

   acd: You have two color choices for the data display: text and background.
   The default values are:
         1,2
   where

          Text           Color 1
          Background     Color 2
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger




     acs: You have four color choices for the source display: the first two
     correspond to the color and background of text, the second two correspond
     to the color and background of highlighted text. (Highlighted text is used
     to show the current position of the program within the file.) The default
     values are:
        1,0,1,3


     where

           Text                        Color 1
           Background                  Color 0
           Highlighted Text            Color 1
           Highlighted Background      Color 3


LIST DISPLAY COMMANDS

>-   add          Display device list
>-   adi          Display interrupt list
>-   adl          Display library list
>-   adp          Display port list
>-   adr          Display resource list

Syntax
      add
      adi
      adl
      adp
      adr
                             SOB Commands



Description
     These commands display the addresses and names of one of the various
     lists pointed to by ExecBase in the Amiga.
>- am            Display memory usage
Syntax
          am

Description
     This command displays the amount of free memory in the system.
>-   ax          Switch between main and alternate .dbg file
Syntax
          ax

Description
     This command is used to switch back and forth between the two "per-
     sonalities" of sdb-that which knows about the source and symbols of the
     test program discussed earlier in this Command section, and that which
     knows about the source and symbols of the library or device driver.

BREAKPOINT COMMANDS
>- bc            Clear a single breakpoint
>- be            Clear all breakpoints
Syntax
      be addr
      bC

Description
     These commands delete breakpoints from the breakpoint table. be deletes
     the single breakpoint specified by the address addr and bC deletes all
     breakpoints from the table.
                            Aztec C Source Level Debugger



~   bd               Display breakpoints
Syntax:
      bd

Description
    This command displays all entries in the breakpoint table.
    For each breakpoint, the following information is displayed:

         • Its address, using a symbolic name, if possible

         • The number of times it has been "hit" without a breakpoint
           being taken

         • The skip count for it

         • The command list for it, if any.

    For example, a bd display might be:
    # - Address                         hits    skip     command
    Cl - c62f9c yrintf                   1        2

    2 - c62b28 prog.c.19                 o        o          p i

    In this example, two breakpoints are in the table. The first is at the beginning
    of the function yrint:f.; a breakpoint will be taken for it every third time
    it is reached, and no command will be executed. Given its current hit count,
    a breakpoint will be taken the next time ~printf is reached.
    The second is on line 19 of the file prog . c; a breakpoint will be taken each
    time this line is about to be executed and will print the value of the variable
    IIi".

~   be               Sets Expression Change Breakpoint
Syntax
         be [expr]
                                SDB Commands



Description
    This command is used to set and clear an expression breakpoint. This
    breakpoint is set by entering an arbitrary C expression. This expression is
    then evaluated each time a function is entered or exited. Whenever it is true,
    the breakpoint is taken, otherwise not. To cause the expression to be
    evaluated on each C source line, you must be running in single step or trace
    mode. This normally is not desirable since it slows down execution speed.
    To clear the breakpoint, use be with no arguments.
~   bm               Sets Memory Change Breakpoint

Syntax
         bm [range]

Description
    This command is used to set or clear memory change breakpoints. It does
    a checksum on the specified range on function entry and exit when the call
    trace mode is active (see bt), or on each instruction when the source line
    trace mode is active (see bT) or when running in single step or trace mode.
    The best way to locate a memory change is to first use the call trace mode
    to narrow it down between function calls. Then use the source line trace or
    single step mode to find the actual instruction.
    When using single step mode in locating a memory change, enter the
    memory change breakpoint and then enter a large numeric prefix followed
    by an S or T. This will allow sdb to continue to check the location after each
    instruction and at the same time not require any input from you until the
    memory location has changed and the breakpoint activated or the specified
    number of instructions have been executed.
    To clear a memory change breakpoint, enter bm with no range.
~   br               Resets breakpoint counters.
Syntax
         br [addr]
                          Aztec C Source Level


Description
    The br command resets the hit counter for the specified breakpoint which
   is at the address addr. If ~Iddr is not given, the hit counters for all breakpoints
   in the breakpoint table are reset.
>- bs             Set or modify a breakpoint

Syntax
         [I] bs addr [;command]

Description
   The bs command enters, a breakpoint into the breakpoint table, or modifies
   an existing entry.
   The optional parameter # is the skip count for the breakpoint. If not
   specified, the skip count is set to 0, meaning that each time the breakpoint
   is reached, it will be taken.
   The optional parameter cmdlist is a list of debugger commands to be
   executed when the breakpoint is taken.
>- bt             Toggle the call trace mode flag
>- bT             Toggle the source line trace mode flag

Syntax
      bt
      bT

Description
   The bt and bT commands toggle the call trace mode and source line trace
   mode flags, respectively. The state of the trace mode flag determines
   whether trace mode is enabled or disabled.
   In call trace mode, the debugger prints the names and arguments of each
   call within the program as it executes. On return, the value of the function's
   return is printed.
   In source line trace mode, each statement of the program is displayed before
   it is executed.
                             SOB Commands



DISPLAY COMMANDS
                 Display Source Context

Syntax
         c

Description
    This command centers the active source line in the source window.
>- da            Display local addresses

Syntax
        da
        dA

Description
    The da command displays the automatic variables of the current function,
    while cIA displays their addresses.
>- db            Display memory in bytes
~   dw           Display memory in words
~   dl           Display memory in long words
~   d            Display memory in last format
Syntax
         db [range]
         dw [range]
         dl [range]

Description
    The db, dw, and dl commands display successive bytes and words of
    memory, respectively.
    d displays memory using the last format specified. For example, if d is
    entered, and db was the last display memory command, then d displays
    bytes, too.
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger



   The starting address of the range parameter is optional; if not specified, it
   defaults to the ending address of the last display's range, plus one. Each line
   of the display begins with the segment and address, followed by a
   hexadecimal display of 16 bytes or 8 words, followed by an ASCII display,
   by bytes, of the same da tao
   For the ASCII display, values falling outside the range Ox20 to Ox7f are
   displayed as a period.
   If the ending address does not fall on a mul tiple of 16 bytes, only the number
   of bytes or words specified in the last line will be displayed.
>- de             Display all code symbols

Syntax
        de

Description
     The dc command lists all the code symbols in the memory-resident
   symbol table. For each symbol, its name and address are displayed.
>- dd             Display aU data symbols
Syntax
         dd

Description
    The dd command lists all the data symbols in the memory-resident
   symbol table. For each symbol, its name and address are displayed.
>- df             Display source file lines

Syntax
         df [filename] range

Description
    The df command displays lines from the source file that was specified by
   the filename parameter.
                                 SOB Commands



     The range parameter specifies the numbers of the lines to be displayed.
     The starting line number is optional; if not specified, the display starts with
     the current line.
     The current line in a source file is set by the source file commands df and I,
     as follows:

          • When the file is first loaded with the df command, the first line
            in the file is the current line

          • When the last source file command was DISPLAY SOURCE, df, the
            current line is the line following the last one displayed

          • When the last source file command was FIND STRING, /, the cur-
            rent line is the line in which the string was found

      The df command also sets the F-DOT for the source file to the number of
     the first line displayed. The F-dot is the line referred to when the starting
     line number of the range in a df command specifies a period (.). Also, source
     string searches begin at the line following the F-dot line.
     Each displayed line is preceded with a line number in decimal, a colon, and
     the line itself.
>-   dg             Display global values

Syntax
          dg

Description
     For each data symbol in the debugger's symbol table, dg displays the type,
     name, and value for that symbol. If the symbol is an array of structures,
     each element in the array will be printed.
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger



>- ds             Displays stack backtrace
>- dS             Displays stack, function arguments, and auto backtrace
Syntax
         [I] ds
         [I] dS command

Description
   The ds command displays infonnation about the current function, the
   function that called it, etc., in reverse order of invocation, back to _mainO,
   the Manx function which called the user's function mainO.
   The optional '#' parameter specifies the number of stack frames to be
   displayed.
   For each function, the infonnation consists of the function name and the
   parameters passed to it.
   Arguments are displayE~d according to their type. If no type infonnation is
   available, the arguments are displayed as a series of 16-bit hex values.
   Arguments of type long or double, when displayed as hex, will be dis-
   played as separate words.
   ds detennines the number of parameters by looking at the instructions
   that follow the address Ito which the function returns.
   ds assumes that the as register points to the C stack frame for the current
   function, unless the current instruction is within 6 bytes of the start of the
   function.
   dS causes the function to be displayed with the types, names, and values
   of each function argument. Below this, the values of all automatic variables
   are displayed.


"FIND SOURCE STRING" COMMAND
>- I              Finds string in source file
Syntax
      Istring
                                  SOB Commands


Description
     This command searches the current source file (e.g., the one displayed in
     the source window) for a specified string.
     The search begins at the line following the current line. If the string is found,
     the current line and the F-dot line of the source file is set to the line
     containing the string; otherwise, these values are unchanged.
     string is the character string to be located, and consists of all characters
     following the / and preceding the carriage return.
     If the first character of the string is 1\, the search will begin with the first
     character on a line. In this case, 1\ is not part of the search string.
     The current line and F-dot line for a source file are defined in the description
     of the elf command.

FRAME COMMANDS
>-   fu            Frame up command
>-   fd            Frame down command

Syntax
      fu
      fd

Description
     Normally, you are only allowed to view variables that are visible by C rules
     at the point where execution stopped. That is, you cannot refer to local
     variables of functions that are not the current active function.
     sdb allows you to get around this restraint by allowing you to change what
     the current function is.
     The fu command allows you to walk up the call frame and displays the line
     from which the call was issued. By changing frames, you can view all the
     local variables of the now current function. You can walk up the frame until
     you get to the initial function.
                           Aztec C Source Level Debugger



   The fd commands allows you to walk down the frame displaying the
   function call of the previous frame.


GO COMMANDS
                  Execute the program
                  Execute the program, without setting table breakpoints

Syntax
         [#]g [addr] [;command]
         [#]G [addr] [;command]

Description
   The g commands transfer control of the processor to your program, at the
   address specified by the pc register. Your program then executes until it
   terminates, an error (such as division by zero) occurs, or a breakpoint is
   taken. Control then returns to the debugger program.
   The parameters to the ~; commands allow one or two temporary break-
   points to be set in memory before your program is executed.
   The difference between the g and the G command is that the G command
   sets in memory just the breakpoints specified in the command itself, while
   the g command also sets the breakpoints specified in the breakpoint table.
   The # and addr parameters define one of tl~e temporary breakpoints that a
   go command can set:

         • # is the skip count for the breakpoint. It defaults to zero, mean-
          ing that the breakpoint is taken every time it is reached.

         • addr is the address for the breakpoint

   The @ <function> parameter specifies that a temporary breakpoint is to be
   set at the return address of the specified function. If the function is not
   specified, it defaults to the current function. If a function is specified, the
   breakpoint is set to the address to which the function returns. In this case,
   the breakpoint is not set until the function is entered. Thus, in programs
                                  SDB Commands



    that call the function from several different places, the breakpoint will be
    set at the actual address to which the function returns.
    The cmdlist parameter defines a sequence of debugger commands,
    separated by semicolons, that the debugger is to execute once a breakpoint
    that is specified in the go command is taken. If this parameter is not
    specified, it defaults to the command list used for the last temporary
    breakpoint.
    Before setting breakpoints and transferring control to your program, the
    debugger single steps your program (that is, causes it to execute one
    instruction). This allows the operator to transfer control to a location in the
    program at which there is a breakpoint, without immediately triggering a
    breakpoint and re-entry to the debugger.

LOAD COMMANDS
~   Id              load device symbols
~   11              load library symbols
~   Ip              load program
Syntax
         Id devname
         lllibname
         Ip
         Ip progfile [argl arg2 .••]

Description
    The ld and 11 commands are used to open a second .dbg file for debugging
    a library or device. (See the ax command as well as the De bugging Libraries
    or Device Drivers section of this chapter for a detailed description of these
    commands.)
    The Ip command loads a program into memory. If a symbol table file can
    be found for the program, it is loaded, too.
    If the Ip command is given without parameters, the last Ip command is
    reexecuted. The following comments describe the parameterized version
    ofIp.
                               Aztec C Source Level



Loading the Program
      The parameter progfile specifies the file containing the program.
      If the progfile specifies a drive or path, the file is searched for in just that
      location; otherwise, it is searched for on the current directory of the default
      drive.
      If an attempt is made to load a program when sdb was invoked with a
      program name or a previous Ip progfile was executed, an error will be
      printed and the command ignored.

Loading the Symbol Table
      The name of the file containing the symbol table is assumed to be the same
      as the program filename, with the extension changed to .dbg.
      After the program is loaded, its registers are initialized as though called
      from the CLI with a pointer to the program's arguments. These are available
      to the program as the main function arguments argv[1], argv[2], and so on.
      argv[O] is set to the namE! of the program being debugged, and argc is set to
      the number of arg parameters.
      The U·DOT (e.g., the value of the period parameter associated with the u
      commands) is set to Pc. The D·DOT (the value of the period parameter for
      the d and m commands) is set to O.
      Once a program exits, it must be reloaded with an Ip command before it
      can begin again.

MEMORY MODIFICATION COMMANDS
)0-   mb             Modify bytes of memory
)0-   mw             Modify words of memory
)0-   ml             Modify long words of memory
Syntax
           mb addr      vall      [val2 •••J
           mwaddr       vall      [val2 •.•J
           ml addr      vall      [val2 •••J
                              SOB Commands



Description
   mb, mw, and ml modify bytes, words, and long words of memory, respec-
   tively. The parameter addr specifies the address of the first byte or word to
   be modified.
   The val parameters are expressions whose resulting values are set in
   memory, with vall set in the first byte or word specified, val2 set in the next
   higher byte or word, and so on.
   The val parameters can be separated by spaces or commas.
>- me             Compare memory

Syntax
      me range = addr

Description
    The me command compares two blocks of memory and, for each com-
   parison that fails, displays the corresponding segment, address, and value.
   range specifies one of the blocks of memory. The second begins at addr and
   has the same length as the first block.
>- mf             Fill memory with value

Syntax
         mf range = val

Description
   The mf command sets each byte in a block of memory to a specified value.
   The range parameter specifies the memory block, and val an expression
   whose resulting value is the value to be set in the range.
>- mm             Move memory

Syntax
         mOl range = addr
                            Aztec C Source Level



Description
    The mm command copies one block of memory to another.
    The range parameter specifies the source block and addr the starting address
    of the block to be modified.
~   ms             Search ml~mory
Syntax
         ms range = vall [val'2 ...J

Description
     The ms command searches a block of memory for a sequence of bytes
    having specified values. For each match, the corresponding address of the
    start of the string is displayed.
    range specifies the block of memory. The val parameters are expressions,
    each of whose resulting values is one byte of the search sequence.

OUTPUT CONTROL COMMANDS
~   oe             Toggles command echo flag

Syntax
         oe

Description
    Normally, commands typed into the command area are not displayed in
    the data area. This command acts as a toggle and causes most commands
    to be echoed in the data display. This is useful to separate the output of
    different commands.
~   op             Toggles pause flag
Syntax
         op
                               SDB Commands



Description
    Normally, when more than one data window full of output is generated,
    sdb prompts

        <Hit Any Key to Continue>.
    This command acts as a toggle, allowing the output to continue scrolling
    even though it contains more than one window full of information.
~   ow            Toggles switch to user screen

Syntax
         ow {on I off}

Description
    Normally, sdb only swaps the application screen to the front when you type
    g, s, or t. This is done to avoid unnecessary screen flicker when single
    stepping through a program. The only problem is when the application
    modifies the screen. If this happens, the sdb screen is altered unless it has
    been swapped with your screen. Using this command allows screen swap-
    ping to be switched on/off.

PRINT COMMAND
~   p             Generates formatted output

Syntax
      P [format] [range] [,next]

Description
    The p command generates a formatted display of C variables, arrays, and
    structures, by converting data items in memory to a displayable format
    directed by its type or the optional conversion string format.
    fonnat is an optional list of format specifications, each of which defines the
    type of a data item and the conversion to be performed on it.
    addr specifies the address of the first data item that p is to convert and
    display.
                       Aztec C Source Level Debugger



In the absence of the format string, p looks at the addr to be printed, gets its
typing information from the symbol table, builds and executes the
appropriate format string. For example, to print a structure named symbol
you simply enter:
   p symbo1
which might result in:
   struct symboltb symbol = {
       int s_flag == 10
       char *s narnE~ = OxFF42
       int s_value[2] = {
             10,5



If you then want to display the string pointed to by symbo1. s _name, you
simply type:
    ps *symbo1.s_name
The s indicates that you are overriding the default format for pointer to
char. The result might be:

    pointer
If you wish to create your own format string, here is a description of the
use of format by p: p works its way through the format string, converting
and displaying data items in memory as requested by the format string
items. When p reaches an item in the format string, it converts the data item
at its current address as directed by the format item. When it finishes
processing a format string item, it increments its current address by the size
of the data item that it just processed to be ready to process the next data
item as directed by the next format string item.
If addr is not entered, Ithe starting address is assumed to be the print
command's current address.
Normally, this is the address of the first byte beyond the last data item
converted by the last p command. However, there is a format item that
causes p to remember the address contained in the current data item and
then make that the current address after it finishes processing the entire
format string.
                           SOB Commands



The format items have the form
   [rpt] [indir] [size] descJode

where
desc_code is a single-letter code that defines the type of the data item and
the conversion to be performed upon it. For example,the code d says "take
the two-byte binary value at the current address, convert it to decimal, and
print it". Therefore, if var is an int, the following command could be used
to print its value in decimal:
   pd var
The code x says "take the two-byte binary value at the current address,
convert it to hexadecimal, and print the result". So the hexadecimal value
of var could be printed with the command:
   px var
A format item's indir is a string that consists of zero or more * characters
that are indirection indicators specifying that the value at the current data
item is a pointer to a chain of zero or more pointers, the last of which points
to an object whose type and requested conversion are defined by desc_code.
To find the data object corresponding to a format item that has indirection
indicators, p begins by setting its idea of the address of the data object to
the current address. It then works its way from left to right through the
indirection indicators; for each indicator it replaces its current idea of the
data object address with the pointer that is in the field at this address. The
data object address is distinct from the current address: At the end of this
process, the p command's current address is simply incremented past the
first pointer.
For example, if the variable cp is a short pointer to a character string (e.g.,
its declaration is char *cp), then the string pointed at by cp could be
printed by the command:
   p*s cp
Here we have used the s desc_code, which specifies that the data object is a
character string, and that the string's characters are to be printed, with
possible modifications as noted below, up to a terminating null character.
                      Aztec C Source Level Debugger



After this command, the p command's current address is set to the byte
immediately following cp.
The rpt parameter of a format item defines the number of times that the
item is to be processed. It allows a sequence of rpt identical format items to
be abbreviated by just one such item with a leading rpt count. For example,
if a is an array of floats, then the first five items in this array could be
displayed with the command
   pSf a

This command uses the fact that the desc_code to convert a four-byte floating
point value at the current address to a displayable value is f. This command
is equivalent to the command pfffff a. At the end of this command, the
p command's current address is set to the address of the byte following the
last displayed float.
The size parameter of a format item defines the number of data items that
are to be converted and printed. When the format item does not use
indirection, size has the same effect as rpt; for example, in the pSf a
command above, the 5 could be interpreted as being a size parameter
instead of an rpt parameter.
When the format item does use indirection, then the size parameter defines
the number of data items to be converted and printed at the end of the
indirection chain. For example, if a module defines lpp as a pointer to an
array of pointers to longs (e.g., the declaration of lpp is long **lpp), then
the following command would display the first four longs pointed at by
the first element of the pointer array:
   p**4D lpp
Here we have used the desc_code D, which specifies that a four-byte
signed binary value is converted to decimal and printed.
The following command would display the first three longs pointed at by
the first three elements of the pointer array:
   p3*4D *lpp

To demonstrate further the difference between the rpt and size fields in a
format item, consider the format items 4*d *4d. The first causes the print
command to take the item at the current address as a pointer, increment the
current address by two, convert to decimal and print the two-byte value
                              SDB Commands



   referenced by the pointer, and then repeat the process three more times. At
   the end of the process, the current address has been advanced by eight.
   The second item causes the print command to again take the item at the
   current address as a short pointer, increment the current address by two,
   and then convert to decimal and print the four successive two-byte values
   that begin at the address defined by the pointer. At the end of the process,
   the current address has been advanced by two.
   As an example of the use of format strings containing several format items,
   consider the following code:
      struct {
          int *ip;
          float flt;
          char *cp;
        var = (&i, 3.14159, "ralph");
      int i=2;
   The command:
      p*d2-xf*s2-x var
   prints:
      2 xxxx 3.14159 "ralph" yyyy
   where %XXX is the hexadecimal address of i and yyyy is the hexadecimal
   address of the string.

desc_code List
   The basic desc_codes are as follows:
      b          Converts to hexadecimal and prints a byte.

      d          Converts to decimal and prints a two-byte signed bi-
                 nary value.

      D          Converts to decimal and prints a four-byte signed bi-
                 nary value.

      e          Converts and prints a long double floating point value
                          Aztec C Source Level



      f          Converts and prints a double floating point value.

      F          Converts and prints an eight-byte double.

                 Defines the precision to be used in the display of float-
                 ing point values, e.g., the number of digits to be dis-
                 played to the right of the decimal point. This number
                 precedes the period. For more information, see below.

      o          Converts to octal and prints a two-byte field.

      o          Converts to octal and prints an eight-byte field.

      x         Converts to hexadecimal and prints a 2-byte field.

      X          Converts toO hexadecimal and prints a 4-byte field.

      u          Converts to decimal and prints an unsigned, two-byte
                 value.

      U          Converts to decimal and prints an unsigned, four-byte
                 value.

      c          Prints a character.

      C          Prints a character.

      s          Prints a string up to a terminating null byte.

      S          Prints a string with (without) translation.

Floating Point Number Print Codes
   When a floating point number is displayed in response to an f or F desc _code,
   the precision of the displlay (e.g., the number of digits displayed to the right
   of the decimal point) is determined by the most recently-entered period
   desccode. If a period code has not been entered, the precision of the display
   defaults to 7 digits for floats and 16 for doubles.
                                SOB Commands



   The period desc_code consists of a period preceded by the number of digits
   of precision. For example, the following command contains two desc_codes.
   The first sets the precision to 2 digits, the second then displays a float, listing
   two digits to the right of the decimal point:
      p2.F


Character Print Codes
   For the C and S desc_codes, each character is printed as is, with no transla-
   tions. For the c and s codes, printable ASCII characters (e.g., whose hex
   value is between Ox20 and Ox7f) are printed as is. A character whose hex
   value is less than 0x20 is printed as two characters: " followed by the
   printable character whose hex value equals the original character's value
   plus Ox40. A character whose hex value is Ox80 or greater is displayed as a
   , character followed by the one or two characters that would be printed for
   the character whose hex value equals that of the original character less Ox80.
   For example, Ox4I, OxI, and Ox8I would be printed as A, "A, and '''A,
   respectively.


Special Purpose Codes
   The following desc_codes can be used to assist in the formatting of the p
   output:
          Character          Output
          Norn               Outputs a newline character
          Rorr               Prints a name
          Tort               Outputs a tab character
          "string"           Outputs "string"

   These characters can be preceded by a count specifying the number of
   characters or strings to be output.
                        Aztec C Source Level Debugger



P Command desc_codes For Setting Current Address
   The next group of desc_codes change the p command's notion of the current
   address. They do not cause any printing.
                   Backs up the current address by the size of the last data
                   item.

          - or +   Backs up or advances, respectively, the current address
                   by size bytes, where size is a decimal value preceding the
                   - code. If size is not specified, it defaults to one byte.

          Aora     Remembers the long or short pointer, respectively, that is
                   contained in the current data object. If this pointer is not
                   null, sets the p command current address to this value
                   after the entire format string has been processed.

   If the pointer is null, sets the p command's current address to the value it
   had before the entire format string was processed.
   The A and a descJodes are useful for printing the elements of a linked list.
   For example, consider the following code, which defines the structure for
   a symbol table item and declares sym_head to be a pointer to this structure.
   The program that uses this structure and field will chain symbol table items
   together and set a pointer to the head of the chain in sym_head.
      struct symbol {
      struct symbol '* sym_next;
      char *sym_name;
      unsigned sym_va.l;
      *sym_head;
   The following command would display the symbol table item pointed at
   by sym_head and then set the p command's current address to the next
   symbol table item, which is pointed at by the sym_next field in the first
   item:
      P A"symbol name="#snt"value="x sym_head
   After this command is entered, you can display successive symbol table
   items by simply entering
      p
                              SOB Commands



   The p command's current address is correctly set to the next table item and
   since a format string is not specified, the p command uses the one that it
   last used.
   You can print out multiple symbol table items by entering a single p
   command. To do this, place a comma and the maximum number of items
   to be printed after the command's starting address. The command follows
   the chain, printing symbol table items until it either prints the specified
   number of items.or it prints an item whose sym_next pointer is null. In
   the latter case, it will terminate and leave the p command's current address
   set to the address of the last symbol table item. For example, entering
       P A"symbol name="#snt"value="x sym_head,lOO
   prints symbol table items until it either prints 100 items or it prints an item
   having a null sym_next pointer.
   If P is used, the address of the item is displayed as well .


. QUIT COMMAND
>- q             Quit the debugger

Syntax
         q

Description
    sdb terminates the program being debugged by first checking for an
   _abortO code symbol or an exitO code symbol. If found, the program
   counter is set to that symbol and the program is allowed to resume.
   This is the normal way to exit sdb under most circumstances.
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger



REGISTER COMMAND
~   r            Register display

Syntax
        r
        r <reg>=val

Description
     The r command displays and modifies the registers, including the status
    registers, of the program being debugged.
    The parameter-less version displays the registers. The parameterized ver-
    sion modifies the contents of a register, with <reg> being the name of the
    register to be modified" and val an expression whose resulting value is to
    be set into the register.
    If a MC68881 floating point chip is present and not in the reset state, its
    registers will be displayed as well.

SINGLE STEP COMMANDS
~   S            Single steps the program n times
~   S            Single steps into calls without display
~   t            Single sb~ps n times stepping over calls
~   T            Single steps over calls, display last
Syntax
         #s
         #5
         #t
         #T

Description
    These commands SINGlE STEP your program, e.g., execute its instructions
    one by one.
                              SDB Commands


   The optional # parameter specifies the number of instructions to be ex-
   ecuted. It defaults to one instruction.
   If the count is zero, it goes forever, e.g., OT single steps until a breakpoint
   or an error is encountered.
   The sand S commands differ in that s displays information after each
   single step, whereas S only displays information after the last single step.
   The same is true for the t and T commands.
   The sand t commands differ in that the s commands single step into calls
   when encountered while the t command treats a function call as a single
   step and steps over it.
   The displayed information consists of the source line of the next instruction
   to be executed. When single stepping, breakpoints are not enabled.

UNASSEMBLECOMMANDS
>- u             Unassembles memory, with symbols
>- U             Unassembles memory, without symbols

Syntax
       u range
       Urange

Description
   These commands DISASSEMBLE a range of memory, e.g., display the assemb-
   ly language instructions in the range.
   Both the u and U commands make use of the symbol table during disas-
   sembly. They differ in that the u command includes the symbols+offset as
   part of the assembly language while the U command prints locations in hex
   with the symbol and offset for the location displayed at the far right of the
   line. Also, the U command displays, for each instruction, the hex value of
   each byte of the instruction, whereas the u command will not.
   With the u command, the disassembly of an instruction that references
   memory displays the location as the symbol nearest to the location plus an
                         Aztec C Source Level Debugger



   offset, if possible. With the U command, the location is displayed as a
   hexadecimal value.
   The range parameter specifies the area of memory to be disassembled. It
   gives the starting address and either the number of instructions to be
   disassembled or the ending address of the area.
   Only the u (lowercase) command displays the source lines and autos as
   comments.


MACRO COMMANDS
>- x             Create Macro Command
>- X             Display Macro Command
Syntax
         x name macro
       X name

Description
   Macro The x command defines or executes a sequence of debugger com-
   mands, called a macro. X lists the defined macros.
   A macro name consists of a sequence of alphanumeric characters, the first of
   which must be alphabetic, with a limit of 40 characters. Case is not sig-
   nificant.
   A macro is defined by typing the letter x, followed by the name with which
   the macro is to be associated. Then follows the macro's list of debugger
   commands with the commands separated by semicolons.
   A macro is executed by typing x, followed by the name wi th which the macro
   is associated, followed by a carriage return.
   The macros that have been defined can be listed using the command X.
   Macros are automatically saved in a file called xxx.mac where xxx is the
   same as the name of the program being debugged. This file is executed
   automatically when sdb is started.
                              SDB Commands



EXPRESSION COMMANDS

.. =              Display the value of an expression in several formats
.. e              Evaluate an expression

Syntax
         = expr
         e expr

Description
   The = command displays the value of an expression.
   The expression is displayed in several formats: hexadecimal, signed
   decimal, unsigned decimal, octal, binary, and ASCII. If a symbol table has
   been loaded, the closest symbol is displayed as well.
   The e command allows you to perform C expression evaluation, including
   calls to C functions, assignment, pre- and post- increment and decrement,
   casts, and conditionals. For example:
         e c   = getchar ()
   might result in:
         =10


REDIRECT COMMAND INPUT/OUTPUT
.. <              Redirect command input
.. >              Log all I/O only
.. »              Log commands only

Syntax
         <filename
         >filename
         »filename
                          Aztec C Source Level Debugger



Description
    The < command causes the debugger to redirect input from a file. This
    command provides a convenient means for defining macros or variables.
    When the end of the file is reached, the debugger returns to the console for
    commands.
    The> command causes the debugger to copy all output to the specified file.
    This feature allows you to keep a record of the commands and responses
    for a debugging session.
    The » command causes the debugger to log commands only to the
    specified file. This is useful if you wish to reexecute a sequence of com-
    mands to reproduce a problem.

HELP COMMAND
~   ?            List command
Syntax
         ?

Description
    This command lists the debugger commands. For groups of related com-
    mands, the listing usuallly lists the first letter of the commands followed by
    a ? You can get a listing of all the commands in such a group by typing the
    letter, the?, and return.
    For example, the listing for the display commands is d? Thus you can type
    d? followed by return to get a listing of all the display commands.

CHANGE MODE COMMAND
~   z            Change mode command
Syntax
         z
                               SDB Commands


Description
   The z command allows you to switch from source mode to assembly mode
   and back again. By default, the debugger starts in source mode unless you
   specify option -a on the command line.

DELAY COMMAND

>- &               Delay sdb
Syntax
         & [cnt]

Description
   This command delays sdb for cnt seconds or until you hit return if a cnt is
   not given. Its primary purpose is for use in the demo scripts where the
   application screen is displayed for a couple of seconds while sdb waits.
                  Aztec C Source Level Debugger



Command Summalry
AMIGA SPECIFIC COMMANDS
     ace         show / set the command window colors
     acd         show / set the data window colors
     acs         show/set the source window colors
     add         display device list
     adi         display interrupt list
     adl         display library list
     adp         display port list
     adr         display resource list
     am          display memory usage
     ax          switch between main and alternate .dbg file

BREAKPOINT COMM,~NDS
     bclbC       clear one/ all breakpoints
     bd          display the breakpoint table
     be          set expression breakpoint
     bm          set memory change breakpoint
     br          reset the breakpoint counters
     bs          set or modify a breakpoint
     btlbT       enable/ disable trace mode

DISPLAY COMMANDS
     c           display source context
     daJdA       display local variables/addresses
     db/dw/dVd   display memory in bytes/words/long words/last
                     format
     dcldd       displlay code/ data symbols
     df          displlay source file lines
     dg          display global values
     ds/dS       display stack backtrace
                      SDB Commands



FIND SOURCE STRING COMMAND
     /          find string in source file

CHANGE FRAME COMMANDS
     fu         walk up the call frame
     fd         walk down the call frame

GO COMMAND
     giG        execute program

LOAD COMMAND
     ld         load device symbols
     11         load library symbols
     lp         load program

MEMORY MODIFICATION COMMANDS
     mb/mw/ml   modify bytes/words/long words of memory
     me         compare areas of memory
     mf         fill memory
     mm         move memory
     ms         search memory
OUTPUT CONTROL COMMANDS
     oe         toggle command echo flag
     op         toggle pause flag
     ow         toggle switch to user screen

FORMATTED PRINT COMMAND
     p          generate formatted print

QUIT COMMAND
     q          quit debugger
                Aztec C Source Level



REGISTER COMMAND
     r     register display

SINGLE STEP COMMANDS
     sIS   single step with/without display, stepping into function
              calls
     tIT   single step with/without display, stepping over function
              calls

UNASSEMBLY COMMANDS
     u/U   unassemble memory

MACRO COMMANDS
     xIX   define or execute/display a command macro
EXPRESSION COMMJ~NDS
     =     display value of an expression in several formats
     e     evaluate an expression
REDIRECT COMMAND INPUT
     <     redirect command input
     >     log all input/ output
     »     log commands only

HELP COMMAND
     ?     list debllgger commands

CHANGE MODE COMMAND
     z     switch from source to assembly mode and back

DELAY COMMAND
     &     delay until return or specified seconds
                                  Index

#acs command, 4-46
$ character, 4-8
& command, 4-45, 4-48
-a option, 2-4
-cc option, 2-4
-cd option, 2-4
-cs option, 2-4
-cw option, 2-5
-d option, 2-5
-e option, 2-5
-h option, 2-5
-m option, 2-5
-n option, 2-5
-p option
    -w mode, 2-5
-r option, 2-5
    use with REZ utility, 2-5
-s option, 2-5
-w option, 2-5
/ command, 4-7, 4-25, 4-47
68010,1-2
68020,1-2
68030,1-2
< command, 4-11,4-44
    See also redirect commands
= command, 4-11, 4-43, 4-48
    expression commands, 4-43
> command, 4-11, 4-44
    See also redirect commands
» command, 4-11, 4-44
    See also redirect commands
? command, 4-2, 4-11, 4-44,4-48
A
    acc command, 4-15, 4-46
       description, 4-15
    acd command, 4-15, 4·46
    acs command, 4-15 - 4-16
    add command, 4-4, 4-16, 4-46
    ADDR,4-14
       definition, 4-13
       examples, 4-13
    adi command,4-16,4-46
    adl command, 4-4, 4-16,4-46
    adp command, 4-16,4-46
    adr command, 4-16, 4-46
    am command, 4-17, 4-406
    Amiga specific commands
        listing, 4-46
        acc command, 4-15
        acd command, 4-1 S
        acs command, 4-15 - 4-16
        add command, 4-16
        adi command, 4-16
        adl command, 4-16
        adp command,4-16
        adr command, 4-16
        am command, 4-17
       ax command, 4-17
    ax command, 4-4, 4-17, 4-46

B
    b commands, 4-5
    backtracing, 4-6
    basic commands
       display, 4-1
       evaluate, 4-2
       frame, 4-2
       help,4-2
       memory modify, 4-2
       print, 4-2
       register, 4-2


                                   ii
        single step, 4-2
        transfer control commands, 4-2
        unassemble,4-2
    bc/bC command, 4-17, 4-46
    bd command, 4-18, 4-46
    be command, 4-6, 4-18, 4-46
    bin directory, 2-2
    bm command, 4-19, 4-46
    br command, 4-20,4-46
    breakpoint commands, 4-5
       See also specific command
       b, 4-17 - 4-18
       bc/bC,4-17
       bd,4-18
       be, 4-18
       bm,4-19
       br,4-20
       bs, 3-4,4-20
       bt/bT,4-20
       listing, 4-46
    breakpoints, 4-5 - 4-6
       expression, 4-18
       memory change, 4-19
       one-time, 3-3
        permanent, 3-3 - 3-4
    bs command, 4-20, 4-46
        examples, 3-4
    bt/bT command, 4-6, 4-20,4-46

c
    c command, 3-2, 4-7,4-21,4-46
    C source file, 2-3
    call trace mode, 4-20
        enabling and disabling, 4-6
    categories
        backtracing, 4-6
        basic commands, 4-1 - 4-2
        breakpoints, 4-5 - 4-6
        command display, 4-9
        command line, 4-10


                                      iii
   command line editing, 4-9 - 4-10
   debugging device drivers, 4-4
   debugging libraries, 4-4
   displaying source files, 4-7
   expression breakpoints, 4-6
   loading programs and symbols, 4-3
   macros, 4-7
   names,4-3
   other features, 4-11- 4-12
   source and data displays, 4-8
   term definitions, 4-1l2 - 4-14
   trace mode, 4-6
   windows, 4-7 - 4-8
cd option, 2-4
change frame commands
   listing, 4-47
change mode command
   See z command
   listing, 4-48
   z,4-45
character print codes, 4-37
CLI,2-2
CMDLIST
   definition, 4-14
code and data symbols,. 4-3
color control, 4-10
   window colors, 2-5
command description
   general, 4-1
command display, 4-9
command input
   redirection, 4-11
command line editing, 4-9 - 4-10
   "C,4-10
   "X, 4-10
   ESC character, 4-10
   FlO function key, 4-10
command summary
   amiga specific commands, 4-46
   breakpoint commands, 4-46


                              iv
  change frame commands, 4-47
  change mode command, 4-48
  delay command, 4-48
  display commands, 4-46
  expression commands, 4-48
  find source string command, 4-47
  formatted print command, 4-47
  go command, 4-47
  help command, 4-48
  load command, 4-47
  macintosh specific commands, 4-46
  macro command, 4-48
  memory modification commands, 4-47
  output control commands, 4-47
  quit command, 4-47
  redirect command input, 4-48
  register command, 4-48
  single step commands, 4-48
  unassembly commands, 4-48
commands, detailed descriptions
  See also SDB commands
  Amiga specific, 4-14
  breakpoint, 4-17 - 4-19
  change mode, 4-45
  delay, 4-45
  display, 4-21 - 4-24
  expression, 4-19, 4-43
  find source string, 4-25
  frame, 4-25
  go, 4-26
  help, 4-44
  load, 4-27
  macro, 4-42
  memory modification, 4-28 - 4-29
  output control, 4-30
  print, 4-31 - 4-36,4-38 - 4-39
  quit, 4-39
  redirect input/output, 4-44
  register, 4-40
  single step, 4-40 - 441


                            v
       unassemble, 4-41 - 4-42
    compare memory command, 4-29
    compiler
       -bs option, 2-3,4-4
    control characters
       A,4-12
       AC,4-10
       AD,4-12
       AC,4-12
       AK,4-12
       AL,4-12
       AN,4-12
       AT,4-12
       AU, 4-12
       AV, 4-12
       AW,4-12
       AX, 4-10
       AY,4-12
    control characters, use of, 4-12
    count, 3-2
    loading sdb
        creating "work disk", 2-2
    cs option, 2-4
    current source line, 3-2
    cw option, 2-5

o
    d command, 4-5, 4-21, 4-46
    dal dA command, 4-21, 4-46
    db command, 4-21, 4-46
    dbg file command
       switch between main and alternate, 4-5
    dc command, 4-22, 4-46
    dd command, 4-22, 4-46
    debug file, 2-3
    debugging device drivers, 4-4
    debugging libraries, 4-4
    default settings, 4-11
    delay command
       &,4-45


                                       vi
    listing, 4-48
demonstration programs, 2-1, 2-3
desc_code list, 4-35 - 4-38
desc_codes
    character print codes, 4-37
    examples, 4-33 - 4-34, 4-38
    floating point number print codes, 4-36
device drivers
    debugging, 4-4
df command, 3-2, 4-7, 4-22 - 4-23, 4-46
    range, 3-2
dg command, 4-23, 4-46
disassembly
   See unassemble commands
display code command, 4-3
display code symbols, 4-22
display command, 4-5
display commands, 4-2
   See also specific commands
    =,4-43
   add, 4-16
   adi,4-16
   adl,4-16
   adp,4-16
   adr,4-16
   am, 4-17
   bd,4-18
   c,4-21
   d,4-21
   da/dA,4-21
   db, 4-21
   dc, 4-22
   dd,4-22
   df, 4-22 - 4-23
   dg,4-23
   dl,4-21
    ds/dS,4-24
    dw,4-21
    listing, 4-46
    r,4-40


                                vii
       s/S, 4-40
        t/T,4-40
       x/X,4-42
    display context command, 4-21
    display data symbols, 4-22
    display global value, 4-23
    display memory commands, 4-21
    display register command, 4-40
    display source file lines, 4-22
    display symbols command, 4-3
    displaying assembly, 3-7
    displaying information
        current function, 4-'7
    displaying source files, 3-2,4-7
    displaying the trace of calls, 3-5
    displaying values and <computing expressions, 3-6
    displaying variables, 3··6
    dl command, 4-21, 4-46
    ds/ dS command, 3-5, 4~-7, 4-24,4-46
        example, 3-5
    dw command, 4-21, 4-4~6

E
    e command, 3-6,4-2,4-43,4-48
       example, 3-6
    environment variables
       SDBOPT,2-5,4-11
    evaluate command, 3-6, 4-2
    evaluate expression command, 4-12
    execute program commands, 4-26
    execution
       controlling, 3-3
    EXPR
        definition, 4-13
        example, 4-13
    expression breakpoints, 4-6
    expression commands
        =,4-43
        e,4-43
        listing, 4-48


                                   viii
F
    f command, 4-2
    fd command, 3-7, 4-25, 4-47
    file preparation
        -bs compiler option, 2-3
        -g linker option, 2-3
        executable files, 2-3
    files for debugging
        preparation of, 2-1
    find source string commands, 4-7
         1,4-25
        listing, 4-47
    floating point number print codes, 4-36
    format items
        desc_codes, 4-34 - 4-35
        examples, 4-34 - 4-35
    formatted print command
        listing, 4-47
    frame commands, 4-2
        fd, 3-7, 4-25
        fu, 3-7,4-25
    fu command, 3-7, 4-25, 4-47

G
    giG command, 3-4, 4-2,4-5,4-26,4-47
    gocommand,3-4
       See also giG command
       controlling execution, 3-3
       giG, 4-26
       listing, 4-47

H
    help command, 4-2, 4-12
       ?,4-44
       listing, 4-48
    help screens, 3-1




                                    ix
    installation, 2-2
        getting started, 2-1
        using floppy disk, 2-2
        using hard disk, 2-2

K
    keys
       See also control characters

L
    ld command, 4-4, 4-27, 4-47
    line, 3-2
    linker
         -g option, 2-3, 4-3 - 4-4
    list command
        See help command
    11 command, 4-4, 4-27, 4-47
    load command
         description, 4-27
         Id,4-27
         listing, 4-47
         11,4-27
         loading the program, 4-28
         loading the symbol table, 4-28
         lp, 4-27 - 4-28
    load device symbols command, 4-27
    load library symbols command, 4-27
    load program command, 4-3, 4-27
    loading programs and symbols, 4-3
    loadingsdb
         using floppy drives, 2-2
         using hard disk, 2-2
    log commands, 4-11
         <,4-43
         >,4-43
         »,4-43
     lp command, 2-4,4-3,4-27 - 4-28, 4-47



                                     x
M
    macro commands
       listing, 4-48
       x/X, 4-42
    macros
       defining and executing, 4-7
       fpath,2-6
    mb command, 4-28, 4-47
    mc command, 4-29, 4-47
    memory modification commands, 4-2
        listing, 4-47
        mb,4-28
        mc,4-29
        rnf,4-29
        mI,4-28
        mm,4-30
        ms,4-3O
        mw,4-28
    rnf command, 4-29,4-47
    mI command, 4-28, 4-47
    mm command, 4-30, 4-47
    mode commands
        Seechangemodecornrnand
    move memory command, 4-29
    ms command, 4-30, 4-47
    mw command, 4-28, 4-47

N
    names
       code and data symbols, 4-3
       operator usage of, 4-3
    notation conventions, 1-2

o
    oe command, 4-30, 4-47
    op command, 4-31, 4-47
    operator usage of names, 4-3
    options
       -a , 2-4


                                    xi
       -cc, 2-4
       -cd,2-4
       -cs, 2-4
       -cw,2-5
       -d,2-5
       -e,2-5
       -h,2-5
       -m,2-5
       -n,2-5
       -p,2-5
       -r ,2-5
       -s,2-5
       -w,2-5
    options list, 2-5
    other features
       control characters, use of, 4-12
       evaluate expression command, 4-11
       help command, 4-11
       redirect input command, 4-11
    output commands
       listing, 4-47
    output control commands
       oe,4-30
       op,4-31
       ow, 4-31
    ow command, 4-31,4-47

p
    p command, 4-2, 4-31 - 4-39, 4-47
       current address setting codes, 4-38 - 4-39
       example, 3-6
    parameters, 2-5
    Preferences program, 4-10
    preparation of files for debugging, 2-1, 2-3
    print command, 3-6, 4-2
       character print codes, 4-37
       current address setting codes, 4-38 - 4-39
       desc_code list, 4-35 - 4-38
       description, 4-31 - 4-34
       examples, 4-32 - 4-34


                                     xii
       floating point number print codes, 4-36
       format items, 4-33, 4-35
       p,4-31 - 4-39
       special purpose codes, 4-37
    processors supported, 1-2
    program
       running, 3-3 - 3-4

Q
    q command, 4-39, 4-47
    quit command
       listing, 4-47
       q,4-39

R
    r command, 4-2, 4-40,4-48
    range, 3-2, 4-14
        definition, 4-13
    installation, 2-1
    README file, 1-2, 2-1
    redirect command input
        listing, 4-48
    redirect commands, 4-44
        <,4-43
        description, 4-44
    redirection, 4-11
    register command, 4-2
        listing, 4-48
        r,4-40
    requirements, 1-2
    running the program, 3-3 - 3-4

s
    s option
       fpath macro, 2-6
    siS command, 3-3,4-2, 4-40 - 4-41,4-48
    scratch directory, 2-2
    SDB
       defini tion, 1-1


                                     xiii
SDB commands, 3-7
  See also specific command
   &,4-45
   /,4-7,4-24
  <,4-11,4-43
  =,4-43
  >,4-11,4-43
  »,4-11
  ?,4-44
  ac,4-11
  acc,4-15
  acd,4-15
  acs,4-15
  add, 4-4, 4-16
  adi,4-16
  adl, 4-4, 4-16
  adp,4-16
  adr,4-16
  am, 4-17
  ax, 4-17
  b,4-5
  bc/bC,4-17
  bd,4-18
  be, 4-6, 4-18
  bm,4-19
  br,4-19
  bs, 3-4, 4-20
  bt/bT, 4-6, 4-20
  c, 3-2,4-7,4-21
  d,4-5,4-21
  da/dA,4-21
  db, 4-1, 4-21
  dc, 4-3, 4-22
  dd, 4-3, 4-22
  df, 3-2,4-7,4-22 - 4-23
  dg,4-23
  dl, 4-1, 4-21
  ds/ dS, 3-5, 4-6, 4-24
  dw, 4-1, 4-21
  e, 3-6,4-2,4-43


                              xiv
   f,4-2
   fd, 3-7, 4-25
   fu,4-25
   giG, 3-4, 4-2, 4-6, 4-26 - 4-27
   h,4-2
   ld, 4-4, 4-27
   11,4-4,4-27
   lp, 2~, 4-3, 4-27 - 4-28
   m,4-2
   mb,4-28
   me, 4-29
   rnf,4-29
   mI,4-28
   mm,4-29
   ms,4-30
   mw,4-28
   oe,4-30
   op, 4-30 - 4-31
   ow, 4-31
   p,4-1 - 4-2, 4-31 - 4-39
   p,3-6
   q,4-39
   r, 4-2, 4-40
   s/S,4-2,4~,4-40
   tiT, 3-3, 4-2, 4-40
   u/U, 3-7, 4-2, 4-41
    xiX, 4-7, 4-42
   z,4-44
SDOOPT environment variable, 2-5, 4-11
search memory command, 4-30
single step command
    siS, 3-3
single step commands, 4~
   controlling execution, 3-3
   default settings, 3-3
   listing, 4-48
    siS, 4-40 - 4-41
   tiT, 4-40 - 4-41
sizing icon, 4-7
source and data displays, 4-8


                                     xv
    source file, displaying sections, 3-2
    source line trace mode
        enabling and disabling, 4-6
    source window, 3-2
    special purpose codes, 4-37
    startup, 2-6
    startup SDB, 2-1, 2-4
        from Shell or CU, 2-6
        from the Aztec Shell, 2-4
    statics, 3-7

T
    tiT command, 3-3, 4-2, 4-40 - 4-41,4-48
    technical support, 1-3
    term definitions
        ADDR,4-13
        CMDUST,4-14
        EXPR,4-12
        RANGE, 4-13
    trace mode, 4-6
    trace mode commands, 4-6
       bt/bT,4-20
    transfer control commands, 4-2, 4-5
    truncated lines, 4-8
    tutorial
       introduction, 3-1 - 3-2

u
    u/U command, 3-7,4-41 - 4-42, 4-48
       See also unassemble commands
    unassemble commands, 4-2
       disassembly, 3-7
       listing, 4-48
       u/U,4-41 - 4-42

w
    walking up and down the frames, 3-7
    windows, 4-7
       color control, 2-5


                                      xvi
      colors, 2-5, 4-10
      source and data display, 4-8
    Workbench colors, 4-10

x
    x/X command, 4-7, 4-42, 4-48

z
    z command, 3-3,4-45,4-48




                                     xvii
